============================================================
INSCRIPTION 1: DHARMA_INSIDENKPucangan.xml
Title: Charter of Pucangan (1041-11-6)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: svarga|atīta|homa|nakṣatra|samudra|vāra|pūjā|mantra|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|kalpa|danu|pitr|pralaya
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
   Sanskrit Text    svasti   tribhir api guṇair upeto nr̥ṇāv vidhāne sthitau tathā pralaye  A-guṇa Iti yaḥ prasiddhas tasmai dhātre namas satatam· ⊙    A-gaṇita-vikrama-guruṇā praṇamya-māna  s surādhipena sadā  A p i yas trivikrama Iti prathito loke namas tasmai ⊙   yas sthāṇur apy ati-tarāy ya  epsitārtha-prado guṇair jagatām· v th kalpa-drumam atanum adhaḥ karoti tasmai śivāya  namaḥ ⊙ || ⊙   kīrtyākhaṇḍitayātayā karuṇayā yas strī-paratvan dadhac  cāpākarṣaṇataś ca yaḥ praṇihitan tībraṅ kalaṅkaṅ kare  yaś cāsac-carite parāṅ-mukhatayā śūro raṇe bhīrutāṁ  svair doṣān bhajate gu  ṇais sa jayatād erlaṅga-nāmā
                    nr̥paḥ ⊙   Āsīn nirjita-bhūri-bhū-dhara-gaṇo bhū-pāla-cūḍā-maṇiḥ  prakhyāto bhuvana-traye ’pi mahatā śauryyeṇa siṁhopamaḥ  yenorvī suciran dhr̥tāmita-phalā la  kṣmīś ca no
                    gatvarī sa śrī-kīrti-valānvito yava-patiś śrīśāna-tuṅgāhvayaḥ ⊙    tasyātma-jākaluṣa-mānasa-vāsa-ramyā  haṁsī yathā sugata-pakṣa-sadāvavaddhā  sā rājahaṁsa-mudam eva vivarddhaya  ntī śrīśānatuṅga-vijayeti rarāja rājñī ⊙    mandākinīm iva tadātma-samāṁ samr̥ddhyā  kṣīrārṇavaḥ prathita-śuddhi-guṇāntarātmā  tāñ cākarot praṇayinīn nayanābhinandī  śrī-loka-pāla-nr̥patir nara-nātha-nā  gaḥ ⊙   tasmāt prādur abhūt prabhāva-vibhavo bhū-bhūṣaṇodbhūtaye  bhūtānām bhava-bhāvanodyata-dhiyām bhām bhāvayan bhūtibhiḥ  Ābhiś cāpratima-prabhābhir abhayo bhāsvān ivābhyudyataś  śatrūṇām ibha-kumbha-kumbha-  dalane putraḥ prabhur bhū-bhujām·
                    ⊙   śrī-makuṭa-vaṅśa-varddhana Iti pratīto nr̥ṇām anupamendraḥ  śrīśāna-vaṅśa-tapanas tatāpa śa  t r ū n pratāpena ⊙   tasyādhipasya duhitātimanojña-rupā  mūrteva rā  ja-guṇato yava-rāja-lakṣmīḥ dvīpāntare ’pi subhagena babhūva pitrā  nāmnā kr̥tā khalu guṇa-priya-dharmma-patnī ⊙    Āsīd asāv api viśiṣṭa-viśuddha-janmā  rājānvayād udayanaḥ prathitāt prajātaḥ  tāṁ śrī  matīv vidhivad eva mahendra-dattāv vyaktāhvayo nr̥pa-sutām upayacchate sma ⊙    śreṣṭhaḥ prajāsu sakalāsu kalābhirāmo  rāmo yathā daśarathāt svaguṇair garīyān·  sambhāvitonnata-gatir ma  hasā munīndrair erlaṅga-deva Iti divya-sutas tato ’bhūt· ⊙    śrī-dharmma-vaṁśa Iti pūrva-yavādhipena  sambandhinā guṇa-gaṇa-śra  va ṇotsukena Āhūya sādaram asau sva-sutā-vivāhan  drāk sarvathā  prathita-kīrttir abhūn mahātmā ⊙   Atha bhasmasād abhavad āśu tat-puram  puru-hūta-rāṣṭram iva – dya – ⏑ –  kalinā khalena khalu kiṅkarair vinā  sa narottamena sahito vanāny agāt· ⊙    śākendre śaśa-lāñchanā  bdhi -vadane yāte
                    mahā-vatsare māghe māsi sita-trayodaśa-tithau vāre śaśiny utsukaiḥ  Āgatya praṇatair janair dvija-varais s  āśvā sam abhyarthitaś śrī-lokeśvara-nīralaṅga-nr̥patiḥ  pā hīty apātāṅ
                    kṣitim· ⊙   samrājya-dīkṣitam iman nr̥patin niśamya  śakty  ā jitāri-nikaran nivaho ripūṇām· Adyāpi tad-bhuja-bhujaṅga-talasya śaśvad  abhyasyatīha  capa latvam abhūta-pūrvvam· ⊙   bhūyāṁso yava-bhū-bhujo bubhujire pr̥thvīv vipakṣe ’rthinas  sāmarthyān nr̥pa-janmano na bubhujus taj  jā narendrāsane kintu śrī-jalalaṅga-deva-nr̥patir vaṁśyo ’dhirājāgraṇīr  bhobhuṅkte sa bhu  na kti kevalam arin dvandvam
                    bhraman bhūtale ⊙   bhū-bhr̥n-mastaka-digdha-pāda-yugalas siṁhāsane saṁsthito  mantrālaucana-tat-parair ahar-ahas sambhāṣito mantribhiḥ  bhāsvadbhir lalanānvi  to niviśate vīraiḥ parīto
                    bhr̥śaṁ jyotis tasya parājaye vijayavac citrīyate santatam· ⊙  — enāsya / — air asya / — bhir yasya    putrān mām ativatsalo ’pi sahasā tyaktvā madīyaḥ patis  svarga-strī-gamano  ⏑ – ⏑ ⏑ ⏑ to h/py ājñā-vidheyas tava khyātas tvam bhuvane dayālu-hr̥daya  ḥ stai nyā pravr̥ttiḥ kathaṁ hā rājan· kva kr̥pety arer vanitayā rājāpy upālabhyate ⊙    kaś cin mumukṣu-pa  ⏑ – ⏑ ⏑ – ⏑ – – – vāptaye dhana-malāni mahān arātiḥ  kaś cit tri-viṣṭapa-mukhān nr̥-varasya mantrān  samprāpya śiṣya Iva tena kr̥tas sa Āsīt· ⊙    tuṅgāsau bhuvana-traya  sya maha – – – ⏑ – – ⏑so kiṁ bandhāna cikīrṣayā kṣa ⏑ ⏑ – ṅ kiṁ tadyutesterasaḥ  kiṅ krīḍā-rasa-lipsayā rabhasuyā yasyo  ddha tiḥ kīrttitā kīrttiḥ śuddhi-karīndra  dā dhavala – – mānyate
                    ’har-niśam· ⊙   Indro  na reṣu mati -vāk-cariteṣu dha rmmo vaśyeṣu  pāśa bhr̥d asau dhana-do ’rthi-sārthe saṁhr̥tya hanta  nr̥pa -r ā d iti loka-pālān e  ko bahum pra ⏑ ⏑ – v vriyate sma dhātrā ⊙   Āsīn  n r̥p o ⏑ ⏑ purī-pralayaṁ sa – – viṣṇu-prabhāva iti tasya suto mahātmā   tañ ca ndra-bhūta-vadane śaka-rā ja-varṣa Ekādaśī ⏑ daka – cu ⏑ phalguṇe  v ā n · ⊙   Anyaś ca kaś cid adhamaḥ parudābhidhānas  sākṣād daśānana Ivāvyathayaj jaganti  – – ⏑ – sya ⏑ ⏑ – ⏑ ⏑ –  narendro  rā mātviramya-ca ri to nyavadhīt tam āśu ⊙   tataś ca tad-anantaran nr̥pa-sutañ jigīṣu  r ga tas tad-ālayam aśeṣam eva sahasābhyadhākṣīn nr̥paḥ  punaḥ punar athāgni-bhū  ta-vadane śakābde gate  varo nara-patis tadīya-nagarāṇy adandahyata ⊙   Abhavad api bhuvi strī rākṣasīvogra-vīryyā  vyapagata-bhayam asyās saṅkaṭāṅ gām ayāsī  t· jala-nidhi-śara-randhre śāka-samvatsare ’smin·  nr̥patir abhinad e  tān tat-kṣa ṇaṅ khyāta-kīrttiḥ ⊙   jvalana Iva narendro lelihāno dahat tān  diśam adhikam a  ja yyān dakṣiṇān da kṣiṇatvāt· dhanam atibahu labdhvā tac ca datvātmabhr̥tye  dvijapatimunisaṅghe kīrttim evāharat saḥ ⊙    mānitvād atha śailabhūtalapane śākendravarṣe gate  bhadre  māsi sitatrayodaśatitho vāre budhe pāvane udyuktair balibhir balair agaṇitair gatvā diśam paścimāṁ  rājānav vijayāhvayaṁ samajayad rājā jagatpūjitaḥ ⊙     A tha mu kha śa rarandhre śākavarṣe ṣṭamākhye suragurusitipakṣe kārtike māsi tasmin·  nijabalanigr̥hīto vaiṣṇuguptair upāyais  sapadi vijayavarm  m ā pārthivo dyām aga cchat· ⊙   m  ukha -śara-vivarākhye śāka-rājasya varṣe hata-śaśi-guru-vāre kārtike pañcadaśyām·  ripu-śirasi mahātmā śrī-yava-dvīpa-rājo  jayati nihita-pād  o ratna-siṁhāsana-sthaḥ ⊙   pūrvvādi-dig-vijayinaṁ hata-sarvva-śatrum  ekāta-patram avaner jalalaṅga-devam·  nānyan nirīkṣitum alaṁ subhujopapīḍaṅ  gāḍham pariṣvajati sa  mprati rāja-lakṣmīḥ ⊙     nirjityātha ripūn parākrama-dhanāc chau[r]yyair upāyair api   śaktyākhaṇḍita yā khalu bratitayā vā devatārādhanaiḥ rantuñ jāta-mahā-  kra/śra mas sa  kurute puṇyāśramaṁ śrīmataḥ  pārśve pūgavato girer nara-patiś śrī-nīralaṅgāhvayaḥ ⊙   śr̥ṇvanto rājakīyāśramam asamam iman nandanodyāna-deśyaṅ  gaccha  ntas santatan te py ahamahamikayā
                        vismayālolanetr ā aḥ  mālābhiprīti-kārās stuti-mukharamukhā mukhyam enan nr̥pāṇām mānīnam manyamānā manum iva mahasā  mānanīyav vruvanti ⊙    sādhūnām pathi yātu paura-samitir dharmyā gatir ma ntriṇām bhūyād bhūta-hiteṣiṇo muni-janā Itthan na me prārthanā  yasmiñ jīvati rājñi ra  kṣati bhuvan dharmeṇa
                        siddhyanti te  tasmāc chrī-jala laṅga-deva-nr̥-patir dīrghaṁ sa jīvyād iti ⊙ // ⊙  Old Javanese Text    svasti śaka-varṣātīta 963 kārtika-māsa, tithi daśamī śukla-pakṣa, ha , va ‚ śu , vāra vayaṁ-vayaṁ, căra graha bāyabyastha, Uttarabhadravā da -nakṣatra,
                Ahirbudhna-devatā, bajrayoga, gara ḍ i- ka raṇa, bāruṇya-maṇḍala, Irikā divaśany ājñā śrī mahārāja  rakai halu śrī lokeśvara dharmmavaṅśa
                Airlaṅgānantavikramottuṅgadeva, tinaḍaḥ rakryān· mahāmantrī I hino śrī samaravijaya dha suparṇa ma vā haṇa tguh uttuṅgadeva, Um iṅ so r· I
                rakryān· kanuruhan· pu dharmmamūrtti naro ttama dānaśūra k umo nak ə n i kana ṁ
                ri pucaṅan·, Iṁ barahəm·, Iṁ bapuri, lmaḥniṁ varggāpi ṅhe   susukən·, mapaknā pa ṅ adəganani dharmma karṣyan· śrī
                mahārāja, sambandha, A  n· hana Iṣṭaprārthanā śrī mahārāja ri kālaniṁ
                pralaya riṁ yavadvīpa, I r i kā ṁ śaka k āla  939 ri pra hāra haji vura va ri
                An· vijil· saṅke lva rām·, Ekărṇava rŭpanikāṁ sayavadvīpa rikāṁ kā la, Akveḥ sira vvaṁ mahāviśeṣa pjaḥ, karuhun· An· samaṅkana divaśa śrī
                mahārāja devatā pjaḥ lumāḥ ri saṁ hyaṁ dharmma parhyaṅan i vvatan·, riṁ cetra-māsa,
                śaka-kāla 939 sḍaṁ vāla ka śrī mahārāja Irikāṁ kāla, prasiddha na m blas· tah un· vayaḥnira, tapvan· dahat· kr̥ta-pariśramanireṁ saṁgrāma,
                makahet u rarainira, tapvan enāk· baṅətni denira rumə gəp·
                pasarikəpany āyudhanira, kunaṁ ri sākṣāt n niran· viṣṇumūrt t i, rinakṣaniṁ
                sarbvadevata, Inahākən tan ilva kavaśa deni paṅava śaniṁ mahāpralaya, maṅantīri
                himbaṁniṁ vanagiri, ma kasambhāsana saṁ tāpaśa suddhācāra,
                meriṁ lāvan· hulunira saṅ ek ā ntapratipatti manaḥniran· dāśabhū ta-tanŭpacāran· bhaktiprahva ri lbūni
                pāduka śrī mahārāja, pu narottama, saṁjñānira, sirādini h u l u n· śrī mahārāja Ati dr̥ḍabhakti, tumūt tan sāḥ I saparān· śrī mahārāja, milu
                valkaladhara pinakarovaṁ śrī mahārāja makāhāra sāhā sayeṁ śayeṅ ra saṁ bhikṣuka vanaprastha, tātan· vismr̥ i śrī mahārāja ri kārādhanan· bhaṭāra riṅ ahorātra, nimittani mahābhāranyāsiḥniṁ sarbvadevata I śrī mahārāja, An· sira pi d t nratyayaniṁ sarbvadevata ka lpapādapa Umə:bana bhuvana, kumaliliranaṁ kulit kaki, makadrabyaṁ rājalakṣmī, muvahakna sāśvatā niṁ  rāt·, munarjīvāknaṁ saṁ hyaṁ sarvvadharmma humariṣṭākna hanituniṁ bhuvana, maṁkanābhamataniṁ sarbva devata I śrī mahārāja, huvus ta śrī mahārāja kr̥tasaṁskāra, pratiṣṭa riṁ siṅhāsana, mvaṁ An· kapadasthāniṁ
                pituṁ śrī ma  hārāja haji devatā saṁ lumāḥ riṅ īśānabajra Ikanaṁ halu pinaka ka padasthān· śrī mahārāja, mataṅyan· rakai halu śrī lokeśvara dharmmavaṅśa Airla ṅgā nantavikram ottuṅgadeva saṁjñā kāstvan· śrī mahārāja, de mpuṅku sogata maheśvara mahābrāhmaṇa Irikāṁ śakakāla 941  tā tan· pahī ṅan de śrī mahārāja luma risakə n· sābhamataniṁ sarbvadevatā I sira, kapva kakal imbaṅ ikaṁ kriyā vāhyāntara denira, tan· kasalimur i kadamlaniṁ pūjā, prāyaścitta  ma hābhā raniṁ kasiṅhe śva ranira, marava śā k ə n· sakveḥnik āṁ ka la ṅka satumuvuh i hyaṁ,
                sap i nakahani t uniṁ yavadvīpa, pra bheda  dru ha   ṅ inaranan· si śuvuka l·, man tu ha j ī nadgakn iṁ ka ṭ ula mvaṁ si la ḍ iṁ, nirava ś eṣa I  tta s ama   n ya de śrī mahārāja, ṅuni-ṅuni haji tṅaḥ sapuluḥ tahun· An· paṁ di ri, pinakarovaṁ
                mad v andva yuddhaca kra   vv at· pinja han iṁ vaṅuntur· mvaṁ saṅ ibu Irikāṁ śakakāla 95  1 lumampaḥ ta śrī mahārāja dumon ikāṁ parad āra putra hyaṁ ma ṅ ṅadg i v uru tum u ṁgal i maddhyadeśaniṁ vurahan·,
                Atiśayeṁ mahābalapa rākrama sumorakən haji vəṅkər· saṅa ta ha jy a n·
                pahaR̥p=haR̥pan· mvaṁ haji vaṅk ə r·, kavnaṅ ata Ikā de śrī mahārāja I rikāṁ
                śaka kāla 952 mvaṁ tinuluy hani hanitu n i tu miṅgalakən karājyanira m uvah
                akaḍatvan i L̥ca, tin ū tnikāṁ deśa galuḥ m v aṁ deśa barat·, A n · tinkān·
                sināhasan irikāṁ śakakāla 9  5 3 d e śrī mahārā ja, muvaḥ
                hana ta putra haji vaṅ ka r· ma ṅ adg i vur u rt u p j aḥ Ata Ikā de śrī mahārāja
                Irikāṁ śakakāla 954 sahanani vargga la ṁ ḍiṁ rāk·, mvaṁ hiR̥ṁ-hiR̥ṅan · , Iṁ  maṁd on·, lāvan· sahananikāṁ makira- k i rāpā yāmutra hyaṅ amana ḥnya  d e śrī mahārāja, haji
                vura va ri tuvi śrī mahārāja Ata maka puruṣa kā ra
                kahilaṁnira, U saṁ ṅ-u saṁ śrī mahārāja mvaṁ rakryān· kanuruhan· pu narottama, rakryān· kuniṅan pu nīti, ri kāla śrī mahārāja hane magəṁ ha  h ī ṅa nyan· śrī mahārāja sa ṅka ni hilaṁniṁ sahanani han i ihanituniṁ yavadvīpa, kunaṁ kramani kahilaṁ haji vəṅkər· de śrī mahārāja, mū la kaḍatvani ra ri ka paṁ sira naṁ pratiniyata hinārohara deśanirāṅkən· Asujimāsa de śrī mahārāja, muvaḥ Irikāṁ
                śakakāla 95  7 7 vvay a ta, samaṁkana ta ta sirar kapa rājaya ri kapaṁ de śrī mahārāja, sirāmriḥ manusup amet· deśa durgga, matiṅgal·
                tanaya dāra t ka riṁ rājadrabya rājavāha na prakāra, ri kahləma nya Irikāṁ śakakāla 959 vaR̥gg anusup· haji ri kapaṁ mvaṁ balanira
                samāsiḥ ri sira, kavnaṁ ta sira ri sa rasa ratu    vani pa  paṅan· , ha pinakata pakan· t aṇḍasnira de śrī mahārāja Ar paliṅgiḥ moḍo ḍa  ri siṅhāsa na , sampun· saṁkṣipta ta Ikāṁ pralaya  ri yava dvīpa , mat l asan ikā saṁgrāma, ta n hana  saṅśa yani manaḥnikāṁ rāt· An· p paṅəb·
                maka  pārāyana parāyaṇa c chā yā ni pāduka śrī mahārāja, mataṅ yar siddh ākən·  pratijñānira,  madaməl · yaśa pa tap ān iṁ pucaṅan·
                Inusa n·-U san· raghu, yāṅkən· mantras t avanamaskāra śrī mahārāja ri bhaṭāra
                sāri-sāri, mvaṁ paṁ liṅgānanikāṁ  rāt·, karuhun saṅ an ā gataprabhu hlam i dlāhaniṁ dlāha,
                ri kramani de śrī mahārāja munarjīvākən· sāśvatāniṁ sa ya vadv ī pa,  Āpan· saṅ anādi prabhu sakveḥnira sinivi riṁ  yavadvīpa, ka sa dbhāva  han denira,
                t kā maṅgiḥ hay unira  kabeḥ riṅ anādi, tātan· maṅkana śrī mahārāja   s ya n iṁ  nira mvaṁ  abhimata  śrī mahārāja mayva   th ā n i vat ə k ·  maṅaran i h i no ,  dr̥bya haji
                mā su 1 ni  nikāṁ   yaśa patapān · I pucaṅan·, mantən· ta Ikāṁ lmaḥ ri pucaṅan·, I barahə m·, I
                    bapuri   ya · saṁ hyaṁ yaśa
                patapān i pucaṅan· [tan katamāna deniṁ]  vinava saṁ māna [katrīṇi,]  pa ṅkur·, tavan·, tiri p·, mvaṁ saṁ
                    nāyaka pratya ya , piṅhai vahuta rāma, mvaṁ sakveḥ saṁ maṅilala drabya
                    haji m   su khaduḥkha,  sakve ḥ lviranya  sahīṅani lma ḥ saṁ hyaṁ yaśa pa tapān i pucaṅan·     [saṁ maṅilāla] drabya haji vulu-vulu mvaṁ   siṅ ata lviranya,  luməbu ra   saṁ hyaṁ yaśa patapān i pucaṅan·, yan· brāhmaṇa kṣatriya veśya, sudra,
                    caṇḍāla, nāyaka, partyaya,  piṅhai va huta rāma   umulah-u laha kaśva tantrān· saṁ hyaṁ dharmma patapān i pucaṅan· mvaṁ
                    sahīṅaniṁ lmaḥni   nanira I hino   saṁ hyaṁ yaśa patapān·, jaḥ tasmāt· kabvatkarmmāknanya, [bhukt]inira
                    [pañca]mahā pātaka  citralekha I pāduka śrī mahārāja   sira   saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji praśāsti

--- TRANSLATION ---
  Eternal homage to the Creator (Brahmā), who, even though he is
                endowed with the three qualities (of  rajas, sattva and tamas ) in the creation, maintenance and destruction of men,
                is famous as being worthless — [or rather] as free of
                    qualities ! The stanza contains an apparent contradiction
                        ( virodhābhāsa ): two statements appear to contradict each
                    other, and the contradiction is resolved by understanding one of them as a pun
                    (cf. Gerow 1971: 268) . Homage to Him (Viṣṇu) who, though famous in the world to have
                (only) three acts of valour — [or rather,]  who is known as
                    Three-Step , This stanza, too, contains an apparent contradiction
                        ( is always bowed down to
                by the chief of the gods, (i.e. Indra, who is) esteemed because of countless acts of
                valour! virodhābhāsa ). Cf. n. 10. Homage to that Śiva, who, despite being an (immovable) stump —
                [or rather,]  being Sthāṇu, the Stable , Another with his qualities
                abundantly gives people whatever they wish for, and [thus] abases the huge virodhābhāsa. Cf. n. 10. (a-tanu) wish-yielding tree He who has an obsession for women — [or rather]  for
                    feminine grammatical gender by his fame of unimpeded progress [and] by
                    compassion; The words for fame and compassion are both grammatically
                    feminine. The at first sight paradoxical meaning of this and who has severe disrepute in the matter of taxation — [or
                rather] a pāda is produced by misleading the reader into understanding kīrtyā
                        khaṇḍitayātayā akaruṇayā , ‘with reputation of impeded course and
                    with lack of compassion’, and thinking that strīparatvam is a
                    vice. sharp mark  on his hand caused by stretching the bow; and who has fearfulness
                by turning away as a hero in battle — [or rather] apprehensiveness by turning away from unbecoming behavior in pleasure : he partakes of (apparent) vices by his own good
                qualities. May that king called Erlaṅga On the name Erlaṅga, see be
                    victorious! Stutterheim 1929 CHECK PAGE The poetic figure here is parisaṁkhyā or niyamavat śleṣa, in which a double-entendre is explicitly
                    limited to its further or irregular sense (Gerow 1971: 298). The stanza thus
                    becomes a nindāstuti or vyājastuti , praise
                    which appears to be criticism. There was a crest-jewel among kings, who defeated numerous hordes
                of (enemy) kings, famous throughout all three worlds, comparable to a lion by his
                great prowess, who long held the Earth, of unlimited fruits, as well as Lakṣmī
                (Fortune), not fickle [at all in his case]. He was the king of Yava (i.e. Java),
                endowed with fortune, fame and power, called Śrī Īśānatuṅga.  This is King
                    Sindok, also called Śrī Īśānavikramadharmottuṅgadeva. His inscriptions are dated
                    to the first half of the tenth century and come from the lower, middle and upper
                    Brantas Valley. For a summary of colonial-period research, see Cœdès 1975: 128.
                    For more up-to-date information, see De Casparis 1988. His daughter was like a she-goose: she was charming with her pure
                mind and attire  as a she-goose is charming when she stays at pure Lake
                    Mānasa; On she was always attached to the
                doctrine of the Buddha, rājahaṁsa see Vogel 1962:10; on mānasa, ibid. p. 3. as the she-goose is always equipped with
                    well-moving wings. She, increasing only the joy of the king, Her
                    husband, who is identified in the next stanza. her he-goose, was radiant
                as queen Śrī Īśānatuṅgavijayā. And then the king Śrī Lokapāla,  We assume, with Krom 1914,
                    who argued that the Kancana inscription, internally dated to 782 Śaka and issued
                    by a king called Śrī Mahārāja Śrī Bhūvaṇeśvara Viṣṇusakālātmaka Digvijaya
                    Parăkramotuṁgadeva Lokapălalăñcana, must in fact be dated to 872 Śaka, and that
                    the king intended in that inscription could thus be the same one as the one
                    intended here. We would oppose to Damais’ argument (1955: 26) that the dating
                    elements that he took to confirm the date in 782 Śaka may well have been
                    calculated a posteriori for that year, once the inversion 872/782 had been made,
                    intentionally or unintentionally. For details, see Griffiths 2020:
                    133–135. elephant among kings, who caused pleasure to the eyes, made her
                his wife: he, a milk-ocean We are not certain why the poet refers here to the
                    milk-ocean, unless he means the regular ocean by whose inner self was famous for its quality of
                purity; she, like the Mandākinī (i.e. the Ganges), equal to himself in
                prosperity. kṣīrārṇava. On the other hand, the conventionally white colour of the Gaṅgā matches the
                    color of the milk-ocean. In order for an earth-ornament (i.e. a king)  For to appear, a son arose from him, whose wealth constituted his
                majesty and who generated with riches ( bhūbhūṣaṇa referring to kings, cf. e.g. Kṣemendra's Daśāvatāracarita 1.48b: śauryotsāhamahodayāḥ kva
                        bata te bhūbhūṣaṇaṁ bhūmipāḥ ‘Those kings, the ornaments of the
                    earth, who had the pre-eminence of valour and energy — alas, where are
                    they?’. bhūti ) This might
                    also allude to the sacred ashes ( the splendor of those living beings whose minds were
                disciplined in meditating on Bhava (i.e. Śiva). And by these [riches] of
                incomparable radiance he had become undauntedly prominent, like the sun vibhūti ) used by Śaiva
                    ascetics. having risen benevolently , (a king) able
                    ( prabhu ) to shatter the frontal globes of the elephants of
                enemy kings as if they were pots. The stanza is a virtuosic example of anuprāsa (alliteration, see Gerow 1971:
                102ff). Known as Śrī Makuṭavaṁśavardhana, an incomparable chief
                    (  indra ) of men, sun in the lineage of Śrī Īśāna, he scorched
                the enemies with his splendor. The extremely beautiful daughter of that king was, thanks to the
                king’s virtues, like the embodied royal fortune of Java, even though on another
                island; she was clearly made by her fortunate (i.e. happily married) father “the
                lawful wife of the one who is fond of virtues” by her name.  This probably means
                    that her father gave her the name Guṇapriyadharmapatnī, and thus he made her the
                    person denoted by that name, that is the future wife of a virtuous king, already
                    when she was born. Other interpretations of this verse are also possible, e.g.
                    “The extremely beautiful daughter of that king was like the royal fortune of
                    Yava (i.e. Java) incarnate thanks to her royal virtues, even though her father
                    was fortunate (i.e. by being happily married) on another island. She was clearly
                    made by him Guṇapriyadharmapatnī by name.” Guṇapriyadharmapatnī could be
                    interpreted as “the lawful wife of one who is fond of virtues” or “a lawful wife
                    who is fond of virtues”, or even “the wife of Dharma, who is fond of virtues”,
                    Dharma being shorthand for Dharmodayanavarmadeva? Inscriptions of
                    Guṇapriyadharmapatnī and Dharmodayanavarmadeva are known from Bali from around
                    the turn of the first millennium (see Damais 1952: 86–7); an inscription of
                    Dharmmodayana Warmmadeva alone is dated to 1011 CE (cf. Damais 1959: 682, Coedès
                    1975: 129). There was also that Udayana, of distinguished and pure birth,
                born from a famous royal lineage. True to his name,  Udayana might have been he married that
                illustrious princess Mahendradattā (= Guṇapriyadharmapatnī) with proper rites. vyaktāhvaya because his name was well-known from the Br̥hatkathā . Or because udayana means
                    ‘rising’, he might have had an ‘explicit name’, a name that corresponded to his
                    rising in status by marrying the Javanese princess. From him was born a divine son called Erlaṅgadeva, as Rāma was
                born from Daśaratha. He was the best among all people, delightful because of the
                arts [he mastered], even more venerable than him because of his good qualities,
                whose exalted career was predicted by the best sages because of his
                    majesty.  The poetic figure in this verse is antādika
                        yamaka (Gerow 1971: 225): the repeated elements are the last half
                    of the first pāda and the first half of the second. If we pronounced the name of
                    the son as Airlaṅga, we would get another antādika
                    yamaka. When the previous king of Java called Śrī Dharmavaṁśa, his
                    in-law,  If Dharmavaṁśa intended to give his daughter to Erlaṅga in
                    marriage, the word who delighted in hearing of his many virtues, invited him respectfully to the
                wedding of his daughter, he quickly became famous in all respects sambandhin could be interpreted as “future
                    in-law”. Another possibility is that Dharmavaṁśa was the husband of another
                    daughter of Makuṭavaṁśavardhana. Then his daughter was Erlaṅga’s cousin. as  Śrī Dharmavaṁśa, Since Dharmavaṁśa was the name of both
                    Təguh and Airlaṅga, we have translated a man of
                noble nature. śrīdharmavaṁśa iti twice. Cf. line 2 in the Old Javanese part of the inscription. The verse could be, and indeed has been, interpreted in two
                    different ways: Dharmavaṁśa invited Erlaṅga to marry his daughter, or he invited
                    him simply as a guest to the wedding of his daughter marrying someone else. See
                    discussion in Boechari 1962: 78–79 n. 43 = 2012: 79–80, n. 24. One might think
                    that the former meaning would have been expressed with a different, clearer
                    construction, e.g. with an infinitive or an
                    A rtham- construction (“to marry his daughter”), and perhaps
                    our poet would have been capable of finding a less ambiguous solution to express
                    this. On the other hand this verse might continue the parallelism with Rāma, who
                    was invited to Sītā’s svayaṁvara by Janaka. Then his (Dharmavaṁśa Təguh’s) city suddenly turned to ashes, …
                like the kingdom of Indra. Clearly because of the rogue Kali (Age), he went to the
                forest without servants, together with Narottama.  Airlaṅga went to the forest
                    just as Rāma did, both with just a few companions: Rāma with Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa,
                    Airlaṅga with Narottama. Or did Airlaṅga also take his wife with him? Was that
                    wife the daughter of Dharmavaṁśa? The stanza does not seem to allude to
                    this. In the elapsed  Śaka year 941, in the month of Māgha, on the 13th day of the
                waxing fortnight, on Monday, having been approached by zealous people who bowed
                down, Śrī Lokeśvara, king Nīralaṅga was requested by the best of brahmins in a way
                that inspired confidence: “Protect the unprotected earth.” yāte ◇ here translated as
                    though equivalent to the term atīta which is a standard
                    element of Old Javanese dating formulae. See also gate in
                    stanzas XXV and XXVIII. Kern in all these instances translates as locative
                    absolute with the participle indicating little more than ‘in’. This was also how
                    French scholars interpreted similar dating formulae in Cambodia inscriptions (K.
                    50/589 ś., ISC , p. 73; K. 154/656 ś., IC II, p. 123). As de Casparis
                    pointed out (de Caparis 1992:490, n. 16), the last line of this verse is
                    reminiscent of verse 4 (line 8) in the Allahabad Pillar Inscription of
                    Samudragupta (fourth century CE), where Candragupta I addresses Samudragupta
                    with the words nikhilāṁ pāhy evam urvvīm iti.  CHECK REF Another parallel, also noticed by de Casparis,
                    is the case of Harṣavardhana (seventh century CE), who, according to Xuanzang,
                    was exhorted by the ministers to become king (Great Tang Record, p. 123f.) CHECK The multitude of enemies, having heard that this king, after
                being consecrated to emperorship, had defeated by his power the horde of foes, here
                even today constantly study the unprecedented swiftness of the palm of his
                serpent-like arm.  Very many kings of Java enjoyed / ruled the earth while being
                petitioners / beggars with respect to their opponents / enemies (indebted to their
                enemies?). By force of their royal birth their sons enjoyed [the earth] in
                succession (reading  anububhujus ) on their thrones. But his
                Majesty, king Jalalaṅgadeva who was born in a good family and is the foremost of
                emperors, does very much enjoy [it]. Only that enemy (reading arir  ddvandvam ) experiences strife / fight wandering on the surface of
                the earth. OR  Their sons did not enjoy [it] by force of their royal birth on the royal throne.  OR  Very many kings of Java ruled the earth while being supplicants with respect to their
                opponents, by force of their royal birth. Their sons did not rule on the throne. But
                his Majesty, king Jalalaṅgadeva, who was born in a good family and is the foremost
                of emperors, does very much rule. Only that enemy (reading  arir
                    ddvandvam ) experiences fight as he wanders on the surface of the
                earth.    madvandva yuddha occurs in face B, l. 19, in
                    the meaning ‘meet in battle’ He is seated on the throne, while his pair of feet are smeared
                by the heads of kings. Every day he converses with his ministers who are engaged in
                reflecting upon counsel.  Or “in counsel and discussion”. Accompanied by
                women and surrounded by splendid heros, he often takes a seat. In a defeat just as
                in victory, his effulgence incessantly causes wonder.   Bhaṭṭikāvya 17:64      tato ’citrīyatāstraughair dhanuś cādhūnayan mahat      rāmaḥ samīhitaṁ tasya nācetan sve na cāpare    comm. āścaryībhūtaḥ, citram āścarye  “My husband, though he is very tender / affectionate, suddenly
                left our sons [and] me, … going to the women in heaven … obeying your command. You
                are known in the world to have a compassionate heart, how can you behave like a
                thief? (read  dayāluhr̥dayas  stainyapravr̥ttiḥ , “practice of theft”; or does he use stenya /
                stainya as an adjective?) Ah, king, where is [your] mercy?” Thus the enemy’s wife
                reproaches even the king. COMMENTARY   svargastrīgamana suggests death in battle, cf. Harivaṁśa 77:23–24,
                Raghuvaṁśa 7:51. One would expect  stainyapravr̥ttiḥ , a tatpuruṣa compound, because stainya does not seem to be used in an adjectival sense. or  stainyapravr̥ttiḥ is a bahuvr. from karmadhāraya: (you) having
                the practice which is theft   stainyā+ sg meaning lowly, vile + vr̥tti in compound     stainyātmavr̥ttiḥ ?   D and K read  dayāluhr̥dayas te nyā pravr̥ttiḥ
                        kathaṁ , how can your behaviour be different? One great enemy … striving for liberation …to achieve … the dirt
                of riches / forest fruits, another one obtained the king’s spells / counsels that
                face heaven / the chief of which is heaven / beginning with heaven / which are the
                source of heaven, was made by him a pupil, so to say.  Xāvāptaye  tadāptaye / tasyāptaye  mumukṣur … jahāti mukteḥ / so vāptaye dhanamalāni ? vanaphalāni?  from the mouth of the king? which is (like?) heaven?  a, cannot end in o ; jijñāsita, jijñāsaka, jijñāsayā,
                jijñāsanaṁ, jijñāsavaḥ  -sya maharovi X jī(ba/jñā)sa  -sya maharo vi – ⏑ jijñāsayā  kiṅ — — bhuvanatrayasya mahato viśvasya jijñāsayā  b, kiṁ sandhānacikīrṣayā kṣitibhujas tībradyutes tejasaḥ (if it were bandhāna, a
                nonexistent form anyway, we would expect kim), “why would a king, whose splendour is
                fierce because of his majesty, wish to make peace / form alliances?” (tīvradyuti
                also means the sun)  c kiṅ krīḍārasalipsayā rabhasayā yasyoddhataiḥ / yasyodyataiḥ kīrtitā  d kīrtiḥ śuddhikarīndubhādhavalabhās sammānyate harniśam  What is the use of strong desire to obtain the pleasure of play for someone whose  purifying fame, which is celebrated by proud people and has a lustre white like
                moonbeams, is honoured day and night?  kiṅ krīḍāraṇa ? kiṅ śrī ?  ‘Indra unto men (=  narendra , king), dharma unto thoughts, words and acts Varuṇa unto those who are to be subjected, Kubera unto supplicants — having assembled
                the world guardians, saying “Behold the ruler of kings!”, he was uniquely chosen by
                the creator to … many.’  c, hanta yavarāḍ ? nr̥parāḍ? bhr̥gurāḍ? hasta?  d, pra…tuṁ ? inf.  cf. RV 2:75cd  narapatikulabhūtyai garbham ādhatta rājñī  gurubhir abhiniviṣṭaṁ lokapālānubhāvaiḥ |  17:76  pañcamaṇ lokapālānām  17:79  indrād vr̥ṣṭir niyamitagadodrekavr̥ttir yamo 'bhūd  yādonāthaḥ śivajalapathaḥ karmaṇe naucarāṇām |  pūrvāpekṣī tadanu vidadhe kośavr̥ddhiṁ kuveras  tasmin daṇḍopanatacaritaṁ bhejire lokapālāḥ ||  cf. Manu 7  rakṣārtham asya sarvasya rājānam asr̥jat prabhuḥ 3  indrānilayamārkāṇām agneś ca varuṇasya ca  candravitteśayoś caiva mātrā nirhr̥tya śāśvatīḥ 4  yasmād eṣāṁ surendrāṇāṁ mātrābhyo nirmito nr̥paḥ  tasmād abhibhavaty eṣa sarvabhūtāni tejasā 5  There was a king … the annihilation of the city … his eminent
                son was called Viṣṇuprabhāva. Him in the Śaka year 951 … eleventh day … in phālguṇa
                …  % if śuklapakṣa: 16 Feb 1030, Monday; if kr̥ṣṇapakṣa: 3 March 1030, Tuesday  % http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/~yanom/pancanga/  On this stanza, see Boechari 1968: 13: n. 8.  ekādaśībadi  ekādaśīśudi  Another one, a very vile man called Paruda, tormented the people
                like an actual Ten-Faced (Rāvaṇa). The king, ..., whose conduct was more pleasurable
                even than that of Rāma, slew him quickly.  Immediately after that the king, who wished to defeat the king’s
                son, went from there and at once burnt down his whole residence. Then, again and
                again, when the Śaka year 953 had elapsed, the excellent king burnt his cities
                    (  nagara ) completely. There was also on the earth a woman, as terrible in might as a
                female  rākṣasa. Without fear, he went to her narrow / dangerous territory. In this Śaka year 954 the king, whose fame
                is well-known, pierced her instantly.   EAST ?    Connection with Calon Araṅ in note of 1917 to transl. Kern.  Like a constantly licking fire, the king burnt that southern
                region, which had been utterly unconquerable, because he was able. Having obtained
                lots of riches and having given them to the community of chief brahmins and sages
                which was supported by him, he only took fame [for himself].    SOUTH    distributing all the loot: like Raghu    Note on strange expression dvijapatimunisaṅgha: is there a
                    connection with Māheśvaras/Mahābrāhmaṇas mention in l. 15 of the OJ face?  Then, because he was proud, in the elapsed Śaka year 957, in the
                month of Bhādra, on the 13th day of the waxing fortnight, on an auspicious
                Wednesday, the king, who is worshipped by the world, went together with zealous,
                strong, innumerable forces in the Western direction and defeated the king called
                Vijaya.  % 19 Aug 1035, but this was a Tuesday !!  % kr̥ṣṇapakṣa 13 bhadra 957 = 3 Sep 1035, Wed; māsy asita ?  % 957 māgha śukla 13 would be 14 Jan 1036 Wed  %  WEST Then in the Śaka year 959, on the 8th of the waxing fortnight of
                the month of Kārtika, on Thursday, seized by his own forces by the stratagems of
                Viṣṇugupta, king Vijayavarman at once went to heaven.  % Reading the data as mukhaśararandhra, the date is verifiable: 20 Oct. 1037,
                Thursday. With Kern's reading muniśararandhra, the weekday is a Sunday.  % need note on Viṣṇugupta's = Kauṭalya's stratagems (sāman, dāna, bheda, daṇḍa)  AŚ 2.10.47ff.  On this stanza, see Boechari 1968: 13: n. 8.    NORTH ?  In the Śaka year 959, on the 15th of the waning fortnight of
                Kārtika, on Thursday, having placed his foot on the head of his enemy, the
                illustrious king of the island of Java is victorious, sitting on the bejewelled
                lion-throne.  % 10 Nov 1037, Thursday  Royal Majesty is now unable to look at anyone else as, pressing
                with her fair arms, she tightly embraces Jalalaṅgadeva, who has conquered the
                directions beginning with the East, who has killed all his enemies, and who is the
                single parasol-bearer of the earth.    digvijaya starting in the East: like in the Raghuvaṁśa  Having defeated his (wordly) enemies by heroic acts and also by
                stratagems, (flowing forth) from the wealth of his valour, (as well as the spiritual
                ones) by observance of vows unimpaired thanks to his power or by worshipping
                        deities,  to
                enjoy himself when a Cf. st. XVI on śaktipāta. great weariness is born in him, His
                Majesty, the king called Nīralaṅga, founds a holy hermitage on the flank of the
                majestic Pūgavat mountain / which has betel-nut trees. Those who hear about this peerless royal hermitage, which
                resembles the Nandana grove, they too, going there continuously, vying with each
                other, their motionless / fixed with wonder, causing joy with garlands, their mouths
                shouting praises, considering him to be the foremost of kings, the lord of the
                high-minded / highly esteemed — they say he is to be venerated as Manu because of
                his majesty.  May the collective of citizens walk on the path of good people,
                may the course of ministers be dharmic, [may] the sages desire the welfare of beings
                — I do not pray like this. They succeed as long as that king lives and protects the
                earth righteously, therefore may the king His Majesty Jalalaṅgadeva live long!  Hail! Elapsed Śaka year 963, month of Kārttika, tenth  tithi , waxing fortnight, (day in the 5-day week being)
                Hariyaṅ, (in the 6-day week) Vagai, Friday, (the Vuku being) Vayaṅvayaṅ (i.e., the
                6th of November 1041 CE), the caragraha residing in the
                North-West, the lunar mansion Uttarabhadravāda, the deity Ahirbudhna, the
                conjunction Bajra, the karaṇa Garaḍi, the maṇḍala being western. On the conversion of this date,
                    see Damais 1955: 66–67 and Eade & Gislén 2000: 75, 146–147. Damais converted
                    the date to Friday the 6th of November 1041. There is no indication of any
                    problems under the entry for this inscription itself, but we learn much further
                    on in his study (1955: 184) that to arrive at his result, he had to assume the
                    occurrence of intercalation in the Śaka year 963. For reasons about which we are
                    in the dark, Damais failed to mention this important fact under the inscription
                    in question. The chart shown by Eade & Gislén shows that all calendrical and
                    cyclical elements are in place if one assumes intercalation which implies that
                    the inscription’s ‘Kārttika’ may be equated to ‘Mārgaśīrṣa’ in the Indian pañcāṅga ‘calender with five elements’ based on the
                    Sanskrit astronomical treatise Sūryasiddhānta (De Casparis
                    1978: 7, 23, 53). That was the time that the decree of the Great King Raka of Halu (named) Śrī
                Lokeśvara Dharmavaṅśa Airlaṅga Anantavikramottuṅgadeva was received by the lord
                Great Minister of Hino (named) Śrī Samaravijaya Dhāmasuparṇavāhana Təguh
                Uttuṅgadeva, coming down to the lord of Kanuruhan (named)  pu Dharmamūrti Narottama Dānaśūra, ordering with regard to Pucaṅan, Barahəm [and]
                Bapuri, that the lands of the varga apiṅhe The term ... be demarcated, for them to be proper to serve as the
                location of the Great King’s foundation for hermits. (a)piṅhe is discussed by Boechari 2012: 41–42, who shows
                    that it is a synonym of patih ; he mentions that the
                    Kamalagyan inscription (959 Śaka) uses varga patih where we
                    have varga apiṅhe , but does not give any interpretation of
                    what varga apiṅhe/patih would mean. Boechari refers to Pigeaud, 1960–63, III, p. 149; IV, p. 385; 468).
                        CHECK. The occasion was that the Great King had had a prayer in view of a desire
                at the time of the disaster on the island of Java in the [year of the] Śaka era 939,
                due to the attack of the king of Vuravari who came out of Lva Rām. At that time, the
                whole of Java resembled one great sea. Many distinguished men died. First and
                foremost did die at that time the late Great King who rests at the holy temple
                foundation in Vvatan. It was in the month of Caitra of the [year of the] Śaka era
                939. The Great King was still a child at that time. In fact he was sixteen years of
                age. He was not very experienced in battle, because he was still young. He was not
                at ease at quickly grasping the ways of handling his weapons. But because he was
                manifestly an incarnation of Viṣṇu, he was the protégé of all the gods, destined not
                to be among those who succumbed to the force of the great disaster, as he stayed on
                the slope of the Vanagiri, conversing with the ascetics of pure conduct [and] being
                accompanied by his servant, whose mind had focused dedication as his bodily services
                were skilled [and] as he was bowed in devotion to the dust on slippers of the Great
                King. His name was Pu Narottama. He was the foremost of the servants of the Great
                King extraordinary in the steadfastness of his devotion, who followed inseparably to
                the Great King’s every destination, wearing bark garments like the Great King, and
                accompanying him in taking all the types of food  Or: ‘taking the same types of
                    food...’. of monks and forest-dwellers. The Great King was never
                negligent in the propitiation of the gods by day and by night. It was the reason of
                the great weight of the love of all the gods for his the Great King, so that he
                became their confidant [in the form of] a wish tree to give the world shade, to
                succeed to his paternal lineage ( kulit kaki ) in owning Royal
                Fortune, to refresh the constant well-being ( sāśvatā ) of the
                world, to restore all holy foundations, [and] to destroy the evil powers
                    ( hanitu ) of the world. Such was the intention of all the gods
                concerning the Great King. The Great King had already undergone due rites, was installed on the lion
                throne, and, insofar as it was the appanage (  kapadasthān ) of the
                Great King’s great-great-grandfather ( pituṅ ), the deified king
                    ( haji devatā ) who rests at Īśānabajra, Halu (also) was the
                appanage of the Great King, On which was why the title Lord
                    ( pitu/pituṁ , see Boechari
                    1962: 79, n. 44, and pages 80–82. Like Boechari, Kern (VG VII,
                        p. 114) also suggests connection of the toponym Īśānabajra with Sindok. Kern
                        already refers to the colophon in Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan lontar, and to
                        Deśavarṇana 20.1, but it seems he doesn’t discuss the issue that Sindok
                        seems here to be associated with Halu, whereas elsewhere he is associated
                        mainly/only with Hino. raka ) of Halu Śrī Lokeśvara Dharmavaṅśa Airlaṅga
                Anantavikrama Uttuṅgadeva was accorded to the Great King by the masters of the
                Buddhists, Śaivas and Mahābrāhmaṇas in [the year of the] Śaka era 941. The way in which the Great King carried out all intentions of all the gods
                with regard to him knew no limits. All together the external and internal rites were
                performed by him.  His attention was not diverted
                from the performance of worship, ... expiation ..., the great weight of his
                Lion-Lordship. He subdued all of the stains that grow on ... of the gods, [and] all
                of the evil powers that the island of Java has. Division ... foe ... called Śuvukal,
                the royal son in-law ( See our lexicographical notes on the base kalimbaṅ . mantu haji ) established at Kaṭula, and
                Laḍiṅ ... complete ... by the Great King, all the more so the king(s)
                    ( haji ) of the middle It is tempting to connect these ... ten years that he reigned, and were his companions (or:
                opponents) when meeting in battle formations ... killed in the outer courtyard
                together with his/their mother(s) in [the year of the] Śaka era 951 ... the Great
                King went to seek out the sons of other wives ( haji ‘kings in the middle’ with the tṅaḥ parad[āra]putra hyaṁ ma(ṅ)adg (i v)uru tum(u)ṁgal (i) who appear in line
                    20. maddhya deśaniṁ vurahan paradāraputra ) of
                the deified one who used to reign at Vuru Tumuṅgal in the middle country of
                        Vurahan. Maybe Vurahan = Vuravan (as in the Sima
                        Anglayang inscr., Mula-Malurung) = Vuravari? Exceedingly powerful and brave, he defeated the King of Vəṅkər. Nine were
                the kings who faced him together with the King of Vəṅkər. Still
                    (  ata ) they were defeated by the Great King in [the year of
                the] Śaka era 952 and immediately the evil powers of ... left his kingdom and again
                settled a palace in Ləca, The suspected subject of this sentence is the king of
                    Vəṅkər. being followed by the country of Galuh and the country of Barat,
                when they were assailed and attacked in [the year of the] Śaka era 953, by the Great
                King. And there was a son of the King of Vəṅkər who reigned at Vuru Rətu (?). He
                died due to the Great King. In [the year of the] Śaka era 954, We presume that
                    the date 954 goes with what follows, because the Sanskrit text (st. XXVI) dates
                    to the same year an event involving a woman, who can hardly be identified with
                    the all of the people of Laṅḍiṅ Rāk and of
                Hirəṅhirəṅan, due to their attacking (? putra mentioned in the clause before that which opens
                    with pjaḥ . iṅ maṅdon ), along with
                those who were plotting for death and the next world of the gods On the words
                    used here, and the problem of what they mean, see n. ... hitting with arrows (?) ... by the Great King. The king
                of Vuravari too, even his demise was orchestrated by the Great King orchestrated.
                The Great King resisted tenaciously together with the lord of Kanuruhan, Pu
                Narottama (and with) the lord of Kuniṅan, Pu Nīti, at the time that the Great King
                was in ... In short, the Great King was the cause of the demise of all the evil
                powers that Yavadvīpa had. 187 . As for the manner in which the King of Vəṅkər perished because of his the
                Great King, originally his palace was in Kapaṅ. He  naṅ (?), We don’t understand the word his land was consistently
                    ( naṅ unless it can be a
                    functional equivalent to ta . pratiniyata ) disturbed by the Great King every month of
                        Asuji. And in [the year of the] Śaka era 957, he was
                completely dissolved, when he was defeated at Kapaṅ by the Great King. TRY TO CONFIRM KERN’S CLAIM (V.G. VIII: 109 n.
                        4) THAT THIS IS AN ALLUSION TO THE DRY SEASON, SUITABLE FOR WARFARE. See
                        email from Jiri. The
                    reading and the word division of the sequence vvayata is very uncertain. If
                    indeed it must be read and divided vvay ata, the basic meaning is ‘just water’,
                    and we would imagine a connection with the metaphor for destruction implicit in
                    the word He tried to hide, looking for an unassailable country,
                abandoning sons, wives, even royal property, royal vehicles and suchlike.
                Subsequently, in [the year of the] Śaka era 959, the king of Kapaṅ had enough of
                hiding along with all of the troops loyal to him. He was allowed to ..., pralaya used elsewhere in this text for Airlaṅga’s
                    own troubles. We
                    translate ... His head was the Great King’s footstool
                    ( kavnaṅ here differently from the occurrence in line
                    21, because in the present situation the subject of the verb form is already kaparājaya ‘defeated’ (lines 27–28). The passage that
                    follows after kavnaṅ ta sira up to pinakatapakan cannot be interpreted, but the fact that
                    Brandes and Kern read ratu suggest that the King of Vəṅkər
                    was given the privilege of becoming Airlaṅga’s vassal king — could an expression
                    like ratu sāmanta (= Sanskrit sāmantarāja ‘vassal king’, see OJED s.v. sāmanta ) be restored in the
                    problematic passage? tapakan ) when he was seated with pendant legs on the Lion
                Throne. The disaster on the island of Java has been summarized. The war ended.
                There was no doubt in the minds of the people, as they took shelter, using as refuge
                the shadow of the sandals of the Great King. This is the reason why he fulfilled his
                        promise  by quickly, swiftly carrying out the meritorious work
                    ( See comparable passage re. pratijñā in the Baru and Terep
                    inscriptions. yaśa ) [of founding] the hermitage at Pucaṅan. It was like
                the Great King’s permanent homage with mantras and eulogies to the Lord and was to
                be evidence for the people, first of all the future kings, thereafter in the
                future’s future, regarding the specifics ( krama ) of the manner of
                Great King’s reviving the constant well-being of the whole island of Java. For all
                of the former ( anādi ) kings were served on the island of Java ...
                character ... by them, and they obtained all of their merit
                ( hayu ) from the past. The Great King was not like that at all ...
                and the Great King’s intention that be beautiful We are unable to verify the
                    reading the villages of the group ... called Hino ... royal property: 1 mayva published by Brandes and Kern. Taking this
                    uncertain reading at face value, we see no other way but to interpret it as a
                    form derived from hayu , though it will be surprising if our
                    text really spells maywa for what would be mahayva in contemporary texts. See the Baru inscription,
                    face A, line 16: yāvat sădhanāniṅ amahayvaṅ bhuvana donanya ‘insofar as the means for realizing the beautification of the world was its
                    aim’. suvarṇa of gold. ... of the meritorious work [of founding]
                the hermitage at Pucaṅan. The lands of Pucaṅan, of Barahəm (and) of Bapuri, cease
                ... The holy hermitage foundation at Pucaṅan may not be entered by the servants of
                the three dignitaries — Paṅkur, Tavan, Tirip — nor by the dependents of
                    chiefs, On the meaning of [such as]: Piṅhais, Vahutas, elders, and any one who enjoys
                usufruct of royal property ... ... fines on offenses, nāyakapratyaya , see De
                    Casparis 1956: 19. Although the Dutch scholar did not interpret it as a
                    compound, the close conjunction with the term hājipratyaya in
                    the Old Malay inscription he was studying suggests that nāyakapratyaya could be a compound as well; the fact,
                    mentioned in our note above (n. XX ), that the words are
                    not normally separated by a punctuation sign points in the same
                    direction. On the of whatever kind ... up to the limits of
                the lands of the holy hermitage foundation at Pucaṅan ... those who enjoy the
                usufruct of royal property: the Vulu-vulus and ... whatever be their kinds. The holy
                hermitage foundation at Pucaṅan would be wiped out if Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas,
                Śūdras, outcasts, dependents of chiefs, Piṅhais, Vahutas, elders ... would meddle
                with the independence of the holy hermitage foundation at Pucaṅan along with
                [everything] up to the limits of the lands of the ... of Hino ... the holy hermitage
                foundation. sukhaduḥkha , see Boechari 2012: 39–41, esp. p. 40:
                        “ sukhaduḥkha bukanlah ‘suka dan duka’, melainkan
                    diterangkan dengan hala hayu , ialah segala perbuatan yang
                    buruk dan yang baik yang terjadi dalam masyarakat, atau seperti yang dimaksudkan
                    di dalam setiap prasasti, yang terjadi dalam lingkungan daerah perdikan. Bahkan
                    sebenarnya hanya perbuatan yang jahat saja yang dimaksudkan. Dengan perkataan
                    lain, sukhaduḥkha ialah segala tindak pidana (yang terjadi di
                    dalam lingkungan daerah perdikan) yang harus dikenai hukuman denda.” Boechari
                    seems to allude to a normative text that gave the explanation hala
                        hayu , but we haven’t yet been able to identify the text in
                    question. For translations of the individual terms, see Boechari 2012: 309–310
                    (Indonesian) and 510 (English). So therefore they will undergo the consequences of their action. The
                (consequences of the) Five Major Sins are their lot. ... calligrapher to his Majesty
                the Great King ... the holy royal decree (in the form of an) edict. 


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 2: DHARMA_INSIDENKMasahar.xml
Title: Charter of Masahar (852 Śaka)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: maṅhuri|homa|nakṣatra|samudra|vāra|samgat|panumbas|sīma|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa|puja
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
   Front  sva sti śaka-varṣātīta 852 punaḥ Aśuji-māsa tithi dvādaśī śukla-pakṣa, tu  U  vr̥ , vāra, Uttarabhadravāda-nakṣatra, Ahirbuddhna-deva tā, I r i kā divasani Ājñă śrī mahārāja rakai hino pu siṇḍok· śrī Īśānavikrama dharmmot t uṅgadeva, Umiṁsor· I samgat·  momah-umaḥ kāliḥ maḍaṇḍar· pu padma, Aṅgəhan· pu kuṇḍala, kumonnakan· Ikanaṁ lmaḥ savaḥ tarukān· I masahar·, vatək· paḍaṁ Ataganni vahuta  U k urnya tampaḥ 3  Iṁ mas· vlin· vinli kā  3  su  5 de rakai hañaṅan· lampuran pu vavu, muAṁ saṅ anakbi dyaḥ parhyaṅan· sĭmān· susukan· Arpa ṇākna I bhaṭāra I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyan·, I paṅurumbigyannira I masahar·, paknānya sīmā punpunana bhaṭāra, Umyāpāra Asiṁ samananā rikanaṁ paṅuru mbigyan·, ka li lirana deniṁ Anak· putu puyut· muniṁ Antaḥ santāna pratisantāna rakai hañaṅan· pu vavu muAṁ saṅ anakbi dyaḥ parhyaṅan·, dāyădya rikanaṁ lmaḥ savaḥ paṅuru mbigyan· I masahar·, maṅkana Iṣṭaprayojana śrī mahārāja rikanaṁ savaḥ tarukān· vinli rakai hañaṅan· laki-bi ri ka naṁ rāma I masahar·, masamū ha, muAṁ Ika naṁ rāma I masahar· matuha manuAm·, vinkas· si nane bapani sinta, vinkas· matuha si vidu bapani balun·, gusti si sutyaṁ bapani maṇik·, tuha banuA si  , parujar· si tuṇḍuṁ, vinkas· rarai si tyanta, Avatəs· si kusut·, huler· si kambar·, matūttakan· vuvusnya sapasug banuA, tumarima Ikanaṁ mas· kā  3  su  5   ra kai hañaṅan· laki-bi, rikanaṁ lmaḥ savaḥ tarukān· I masahar· , tlas· śuddha pariśuddha, māri ta Ikanaṁ rāma I masahar· makatarukān· Ikanaṁ savaḥ bhaṭā ra I  saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyan· Iṁ paṅurumbigyan· I masahar· , prasiddha makasīma Ikanaṁ savaḥ tarukān·, tan· kolah-ulaha tkā Iṁ dlāhaniṁ dlāha, maṅaṁsəA I si ra ra kryān· bini haji rakai śrī maṅgala I tavaṇḍara, pasaṁnya mas· ku  1 sarvvavīja phalaphalī, Umijill aṁkan· Aśuji-māsa tan· byăkṣaipā, kinon· rakai ha ña ṅa n· sumrahakna Ikanaṁ mas· rikaṁ rāma I masahar·, saṁ ḍimal·, Inak-ambak·, vantū, tatha, tatra sākṣī rakryān· I tajuṁ dyaḥ kavī dyaḥ boḍoḥ dyaḥ mana dyaḥ hujuṁ rakryān· I lmaḥ tulis· dyaḥ paṅhuvuṅan·, I mājha dyaḥ varyyaṁ, matəhə r· sumusuk· Ikanaṁ lmaḥ savaḥ tarukān· I masahar· , māri vatak· pa ḍaṁ , Anuṁ humaR̥p· Ikanaṁ susukka n· śīma, samgat· lam ba lampuran· pu bhoga, I mu ḍu han· saṁ piliḥ mas·, muAṁ saṁ varabas·, juru kalula saṁ vaḍa, citrale kha guṇakantan· Iy aṅgəhan· saṁ kakaran· pu munda, juru va dva rarai pu tiñjo, hana pi a ṇ n ka sākṣī rakai vulat patiḥ dyaḥ ḍohol·, samgat· mataṅan·, mu Aṁ dyaḥ ra y u vinaiḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vi ḍolaḥ Avayaṁ si tamblaṁ Abañol· si harama-pramukha Agandur· si cleṁ-pramukha ḍiṇḍi si vahas· A tuvuṁ si labhaṇa si baṅavan·, juru hulun· Iṁ jayamukha, kapuA vinaiḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ, nayaka rikana ṁ vanuA I masahar· saṁ vigata vinaiḥ mā  4 vḍihan· kāru ka yu  2 , partaya Irikanaṁ vanuA si bhayī vinai ḥ  mā  2 vḍihan· hlai 1 bvatoḥ rakryān· havaṁ dhanasuntan· viga si tira bapani papi vinaiḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ, ku naṁ yan· hana vaṅkay· kābunan· kapaṅguha Irikanaṁ śīma mā  4 maparaha Irikanaṁ rāma I jro vanuA, pinanumbasakan· tekanaṁ śīma lmaḥ riṁ kabalan· vluran havannani vuAi nya, tumbasanya de rakai hañaṅan· muAṁ rakai parhyaṅan· su  1  mā  4 śinīma Atəhər·,  pavaiḥ pa ṁ rāma I saṅkanikaṅ uAi mā  2 Aṅkan tahun·, hana ta lmaḥ riṅ kakalaṅan ta mpuhani vvaynikanaṁ vluran· vinli riṁ mā  2 səṁkə:nya ḍpa 2 panumbasan· rakai hañaṅan·, saṁ jeni, saṁ svaran·, parṇnaḥhanikanaṁ śīma tarukān· I masahar· svatantrā tan· katamāna de saṁ mānak katrīṇi, paṅkur·, tavān·, tirip·, muAṁ vadihati, makudur·, patiḥ vahuta saprakāraniṁ maṅilala drabya haji Iṁ daṅū, miśra para-miśra vulu-vulu prakā ra, paṅuraṁ, k r iṁ, paḍam· manimpiki, paranakan·, limus galuḥ, paṅaruhan·, taji, vatu tajam·, sukun·, halu varak·, rakadut·, pinilai, kataṅgaran·, tapa haji, Air ha ji, malandaṁ, L̥ca,  la bballab·, kalaṅkaṁ, kutak·, taṅkil·, tr̥pan·, saluĪt·, tuha dagaṁ, juru gusali, maṁrumbai, maṁguñjai, tuhā n nambi, tuhān hañjaman·, tuhān juḍi, juru jali r·,   , pamaṇ ikan·, maṇiga, sikpan·, rumbān·, vilaṁ vanuA, viji kavaḥ, tiṅkəs·, māvī, miśra hino, vli hapū, vli tambaṁ, vli pañjut·, vli haR̥ṁ, paguluṁ, pabi- sar·,   palamak ·, Urutan·, dampulan·, tpuṁ kavuṁ, suṁsuṁ paṅuraṁ, pasuk alas·, payuṅan·, sipat· bilut·, pāṅinn-aṅin·, pamāvaśya, hopan· turun - tu run·  ·, s ka r tahun·, panusuḥ, mahaliman·, kḍi, valyan·, vidu maṅiduṁ, sambal· , sumbul· , hulun ha j i  I masahar·, kevalā bhaṭāra I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyan· I    kady a ṅgāniṁ mayaṁ tan pavuAḥ, valū rumambat· ri na ta r·,    mamijilaka n· vuriniṁ kikir·, mam ū k·,   Back  sapaṅhiṁ Iriya, knāna sakalviḥnya de saṁ maṅilala sodh āra haji tan· Adhikāna, Irikanaṁ kāla maṅa səAkan· rakai hañaṅan pasambaḥ I śrī mahārāja mas· su  vḍihan· tapis· yu  1  rakai sirikan· pu Amaraindra rakai vka pu balyaṁ, samgat· momah-umaḥ kāliḥ ma daṇḍa r·, Aṁgəha n· , tiruAn· ḍa punta taritip·, InaṁsəAn· pasak-pasak· mas· su  1  mā  4 vḍihan tapis· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, Amrāti havaṁ vicakṣaṇa, maṁhuri paṇ ḍamu An·, halaran pu guṇotama, paṁgil· hyaṁ pu glo, InaṁsəAn pasak-pasa k· mā  10 vḍihan· cadar· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, susuhan· pu səsək·, manuṁku li pŭ dā, vadihati saṁ dinakara, makudur pu balavān·, InaṁsəAn pasak-pa sak· mas· su  1  mā  5 vḍihan· tapis· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, tuhān· I va di hati 2 mira-miraḥ saṁ halaṁ pahuṁ, halaran· saṁ lbur poḥ, tuhān· I makudur· 2 vatu valai ṁ saṁ ra majha, saṁ tpusan· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā  10  vḍi han· cadar· yu  1 sovaṁ, paṅuraṁ I vadihati saṁ ra vuṅū, manuṁgū saṁ hovaṅka I makudur· saṁ ra kbəl·, manuṁgū saṁ kulumpaṁ, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· mā  5 vḍiha n · cadar· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, saṁ tuhān· Iṁ pakaraṇān· juru kanayakān· I ha ji samgat· gunuṅan pu tuntun· , juru vadvā rarai saṁ ra guyu, juru kalula pu bali, kaṇḍam uhi ḍa punta geṣṭa, citralekha ni dh i, prakāśa, parujar· I sirikan· hujuṅ galuḥ I vka viridiḥ I kanuruhan· saṁ rokat·, I sbaṁ saṁ vimala, I srāṅan· saṁ satyaka, I maḍa ṇḍa r· saṁ cakra, Iy aṅgəhan· saṁ vidya, I tiruAn· sumuḍan·, I mamrāti saṁ tu ruhan·, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  1  mā  4 kinabaihanira, saṁ citralekha I ha lu, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  1  mā  4 kinabaihanira, patiḥ juru kāliḥ vasaḥ saṁ kayu matəb·, kuci saṁ buka, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· mā  5 vḍihan· cadar· yu  sovaṁ, parujar piṁsor hyaṁ paskaran· vinaiḥ mas· 1 mā  2  ku  2 vḍihan· cadar· hlai 1  sovaṁ, lumaku manusuk· I vadihati saṁ hovaṅka, lumaku manusuk· I makudur· saṁ pyan·, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· mā  8 vḍihan· cadar· yu  1 sovaṁ, vadvā haji lumaku manusuk· saṁ ra liṇḍiḥ, kahuripan·, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· mā  8 vḍihan· ca dar· hlai 1 sovaṁ, pinakamaṅgalyaniṁ manusuk· śīma ḍaṅ upāddhyāya I bkal· Arthahetoḥ māravijaya, InaṁsəAn· pasak-pasak· mā  8 piṁhai maṁhaR̥p baba k· I bavaṁ saṁ toloboṁ, piṁhai maṁhaR̥p babak· I paḍaṁ saṁ kuṭa, vinaiḥ pasa k-pasak· mas· su  1  mā  4 vḍihan tapis· hlai 1 sovaṁ, piṁhai lampuran· puṇḍuḥ I va ha ru, tāl ḍuA, mabuvur· baruṇa, śikha, Usī, tarikha, lepe, loka, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  2 mā 8 kinabaihanya, vḍihan· ragi hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ , piṁ h ai puṇḍuḥ I siguṇuṁ manuruṁ, kagsaṅan·, maṅuṇḍuḥ, gaṇḍut·, mārgga, kuṇḍū vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  2  mā  8 kinabaihanya, vḍihan· ragi hlai 1 sovaṁ, piṁhai pu ṇḍuḥ I malaṅgat·, ḍa puṅku boceṁ, Utaṁ, bajra, manujendra, sātha, tabəḥ, surā ni, dhaneṣṭi, bañjir·, jaya , vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  2  mā  8 kinabaihanya, vḍiha n· ragi hlai 1  so vaṁ, parujar piṁhai vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā  4 vḍihan· ragi hlai 1  vahuta maṁhaR̥p babak· I bavaṁ mapapan·, cakuṭa, kasugihan·, burīn·, maṇḍamu , vin ai ḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  1  mā  4 kinabaihanya vḍihan· ragi hlai 1 sovaṁ,  vahuta lampuran· vagal·, cetra, lumpat·, bodhi, ginu, ślut·, nakā, sūṅan·, samayī , ba racaḥ , gunuṁ, pindi, purul·, huraṁ, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  2 kinabaihanya vḍi han· ragi hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vahuta I paḍaṁ pagəruyuṁ geṣṭa, labdha, cetrī, satū, horambat·, sumukha, kaṅaḥ, gamaka, śikhara, jalutū, lpas·, tuṅga, maṅu r·, lajur·, koṭor·, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· i su  6  mā  8 kinabaihan ya  vḍi han· kāruka hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vahuta maṁhaR̥p babak· I vsi-vsi baya , g ugagas·, bhuvi, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su  6  mā  8 kinabaihannya vḍiha n kā ruka hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma tpi siriṁ milu pinakasākṣīrikāṁ susukan· śīma I vurarai vinkas· saṁ părtha ramani sotan·, tuha kalaṁ si ḍivut·, I mājha vinkas· si su raḥ ramani handaruAn·, tuha kalaṁ si pkan·, ramani gəgəAn·, I cuguĪ vinkas si garaḥ ramani bindyaṁ, tuha kalaṁ si sandu ramani pañji, I tirim· vinkas si sugəṁ ramani su sī, tuha kalaṁ papəṁ bapani rod·, I lmaḥ tulis· si suradeva ramani balai, si sulya, I marsmu vinkas si racuk· ramani baṅhək·, tuha kalaṁ si vavul· ramani pa san·, Iy aṅgit· vinkas si pātra ra ma ni magum·, tuha kalaṁ si giḍuḥ ramani bama n·, I mabuvur· vinkas si sukət· ramani Agra, tuha kalaṁ si kali, I muṅga vinkas· si khadi ramani maṅraḥ , tuha kalaṁ si p iṅul· ramani cama, I ḍaḍaṁ vinkas si catu ra - mani buhak·, tuha kalaṁ si Uḍik· ramani bu rat·, I paḍaṁ vinkas si kubul· bapani ruma ·, tuha kalaṁ si ḍaṅaḥ bapani padma, I rambai rāma kabayan· sām ba śā  i vi n ka s si bañjar bapani lañcaṁ, si kaṇḍi bapa ni Aṇḍur·, tuha kalaṁ si raddiṁ, I tuvuṁ vi nkas si luka bapani yukti, Iṁ ja yamukha vinkas si taḍaḥ bapani  l iran·, rambai, tuha kalaṁ vuravan· bapani panahilan·, si duṅut bapani ñcaḥ, I panammuAn· vinkas si lka bapani kurantil·, I hanta ña vi nkas si    vi n ai ḥ pasak- p asak· ma s· mā  8 Iṁ savan u A-savan u A  vḍ i han · ra gi hlai 1  so vaṁ-sovaṁ, I masahar· tuha kalaṁ śvara n· v i naiḥ   Proper right  knanya pa tyanantā ya kamuṁ hyaṁ de yantat pa t īya tatt anoliha  I vu ntat·, ta t tiṁhala I li kuran·, taruṁ riṅ adga n· tampyal·  I viraṅan·, Uvahi I  tṅanan·  tutuḥ tuṇḍunya, blaḥ ka pālanya,  sbittakan· vtaṁnya, ranta n · Usunya  vtuAkan· ḍalmanya, ḍuḍu k· hati nya, paṅan dagiṁnya, Inum· rāḥnya  təhər pəpəddakan· vkasa ka n· prā nantika, ya n parā riṅ ala s · paṅa nanni ṁ moṁ , patukniṁṅ ulā, pul irakna niṁ devamanyu, yan parā riṁ tga l· A lappaniṁ gla p· sampalanniṁ rā kṣa sa  paṅananniṁ vuIl si pamuṅuAn·, A raḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ kuśika gargga metrī kuruṣya pātāñjala, suvuk· lor suvuk kidul kuluAn· vetā n·, buAṅakan· ri ṅ ākāśa, sala mbittakan· Iṁ hyaṁ kabaiḥ tibākan· riṁ mahāsamudra, klammakan· riṁ ḍavu han·  Alapan· saṁ hyaṁ jalamm er·, dudu tanniṁ tuviran·, saṁhapanni ṁ vuhaya, ṅkānan matya Ikanaṁṅ vaṁ Anyāya lumbur· Ikeṁ lmaḥ sava ḥ  śīma taru kā n· I masaha r ·  Proper left  I tlas saṁ makudur· maṅuyut· ma salin· sira kabaiḥ kapva maluṁgu ḥ  Iṁ tkan· pasak·, tumūt krama saṁ ha na riṁ kon· patiḥ vahuta rāma ka bayan·, muAṁ rāma tpi si riṁ matuha ma nuAm·, laki-laki vadvan· tan ha na kāntun· Ilu manaḍaḥ riṁ paglaran· kinu ran·-kuran· InaṁsəAn· sku l· dāndānan·, hinirusan kla-kla Ambill-ambil·, kasyan·, lit·-li t·, tlu sānak·, saṅa-saṅān·, ru mba-rumbaḥ kuluban·, tetis·, tu mpuk-tumpuk·, ḍeṁ hañaṁ, ḍeṁ ha sin·, kakap·, huraṁ, biluṁluṁ, ka van·, rumahan·, hala-hala, hanti ga Inariṁ, suṇṭa, Atak·, pəhan· tahulan· ginaṅanan·, haryyas· piṇḍa gaṅan· Iṁ saron· 10 len· saṅkā riṁ Ivak·, knas· prakāra, A naḍaḥ sira kabaiḥ y thāsukha, ma u a ṅinum· siddhu, ciñca, tuAk·, piṁti ga sovaṁ, vinuvuhan· tambul· I nañjapan·, kuravu, kurima, Asa m·, dva-dval·, kapva madulur malariḥ Umaṁ sə: taṁ jnu skar·, Ana_bəḥ ta saṁ matuvuṁ, maṁḍi ri ta sira ka baiḥ patiḥ pramukha, kapva manam baḥ  huma rap· sakahanān· śr ī mahā rāja //  Ø //

--- TRANSLATION ---
  Hail! Elapsed Śaka year 852, additional month of Aśuji, twelfth  tithi , waxing fortnight, Tuṅlai, Umanis, Thursday, lunar mansion Uttarabhadravāda, the deity Ahirbudhna. That was when the decree of the Great King, the Lord of Hino,  called  pu Siṇḍok Śrī Īśānavikrama Dharmmottuṅgadeva came down to both of the resident officials: the momah-umah one of  maḍaṇḍar  called  pu Padma and the one of  aṅgəhan  called  pu Kuṇḍala. It gave an order with regard to the paddy-field land  used as settlement at Masahar, district of Paḍaṅ, circumscription of the atagan vahuta  — its measurement 3 tampah , purchased for 3 kāṭi  and 5 suvarṇa of gold by the Lord of Hañaṅan Lampuran called  pu Vavu and his wife called  dyah Parhyaṅan: — that it be made into a  sīma  and demarcated that it be presented to the deity in the holy devotional temple in their  paṅurumbigyan at Masahar that it served to become a  sīma domain of the Deity for maintenance of anything that is in disrepair in the paṅurumbigyan that it be inherited by the children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, descendants of great-great-great-grandchildren in short, by all descendants in continuous succession of the Lord of Hañaṅan pu Vavu and his wife dyah Parhyaṅan who shall be the heiress dāyādya This seems to be from Skt. to the dāyāda ‘heir’ and more specifically from the feminine form dāyādī . It looks like dāyădya is an irrealis form derived from the latter and hence has to mean ‘heiress’. paṅurumbigyan paddy-field land at Masahar. Such was the intention of the Great King regarding the paddy-fields  used as settlement purchased by the Lord and Lady of Hañaṅan, husband and wife, raka The expression of from the headmen at Masahar all together. And the headmen at Masahar, senior and junior, were the laki-bi (also in A9 just below), though recorded in OJED , is not found elsewhere in epigraphic texts as far as we know. vinəkas  called  si Nane, father of Sinta; the senior vinəkas  called  si Vidu, father of Balun; the gusti  called  si Sutyaṅ, father of Maṇik; the village foreman called  si  ; the herald called  si Tuṇḍuṅ; the junior vinəkas  called  si Tyanta; the avatəs  called  si Kusut; the irrigation overseer called  si Kambar. According to what was said by all inhabitants of the village, they received 3 kāṭi and 5 suvarṇa of gold from (?) the Lord and Lady of Hañaṅan, husband and wife, for the paddy-field land used as settlement at Masahar. After  the purchase was fully validated, the headmen at Masahar ceased to use as settlement the paddy-fields of the Deity in the holy devotional temple in the paṅurumbigyan at Masahar, which actually had the paddy-field settlement as prasiddha sīma , not to be disturbed up to the future’s future. The Lady Royal Wife of the Lord of Śrī Maṅgala at Tavaṇḍara would offer them gifts: the arrangement/honorarium ? for them was 1 pasaṅ kupaṅ of gold, all grain-crops and all different kinds of fruits, The similar expression produced every month of Aśuji without delay sarbvaphalaphali is found in the Barahasrama charter (1v11) while sarv(v)aphala is found in two Airlangga inscriptions, namely Kusambyan (B31–32) and Sima Anglayang (17r4) as well as in a charter from the Kadiri period, namely Padlegan I (18). . byākṣepa This word, not recorded in The Lord and Lady of Hañaṅan were ordered to hand over the gold to the headmen at Masahar, OJED , is found also in Muncang (A46). It is from Sanskrit vyākṣepa . namely  saṅ Ḍimal, Inak-Ambak, Vantū and Tatha. Witnesses thereof: the Lords of Tajuṅ called  dyah Kavī, dyah Boḍoh, dyah Mana  and  dyah Hujuṅ; the Lord of Ləmah Tulis called  dyah Paṅhuvuṅan; the Lord of Mājha called  dyah Varyaṅ. Then they demarcated the paddy-field land used as settlement at Masahar, which ceased to belong to the district of Paḍaṅ. The ones who attended  humarəp This meaning is not clearly included in the OJED under humarəp . sīma demarcation: Present as witnesses were the Lord of Vulat Patih the official of Lamba, the Lampuran  called  pu Bhoga;  the ones of Muḍuhan called  saṅ Pilih Mas and saṅ Varabas; the supervisor of servants  called  saṅ Vaḍa the calligrapher ‘of known virtue’  at Aṅgəhan, the guṇa-kantan ? kakaran  called  pu Munda; This figure also appears in Alasantan 3r2 ( kakaran· pu munda vḍihan· hlai 1 ), the meaning of the term kakaran being unknown. the overseer of junior troops called  pu Tiñjo. called  dyah Ḍohol, This figure also appears in the official of Mataṅan and Alasantan 2r18 and 4r16. The name Vulat Patih is a synonym of Tiṅhal Piṅhai which figures as a vatək in the Cane charter. dyah Rayu. They all were given 1 sheet of vəḍihan cloth per person. the puppeteer called  si Tamblaṅ; the jester, called  Harama-pramukha; the agandur si called  si Cleṅ and the ḍiṇḍi called  si Vahas; Some other inscriptions ( the tuvuṅ players Gulung-Gulung f7, f10–12; Jeru-Jeru d18, d21–22) figure performers with names ending in - pramukha . We suspect the terms agandur and ḍiṇḍi , not found in any other sources known to us, designate roles analogous to avayaṅ and abañol . called  si Labhaṇa and  si Baṅavan; the head of the servants of Jayamukha; all of them were given 1 sheet of vəḍihan cloth each. The nayaka of the village of Masahar called  saṅ Vigata was given 4 māṣa  and 2 pair of vəḍihan kāruka . The partaya of the same village called  si Bhayī was given 2 māṣa  and 1 sheet of vəḍihan . The overseers of gamblers (?), the Lord of Havaṅ Dhanasuntan viga (?) and  si Tira, father of Papi, were given 1 sheet of vəḍihan each. Further, if there is ‘a corpse covered with dew’  encountered in the baṅkay kābunan sīma , the fine of 4 māṣa would be credited to the headman of the inner village . jro vanua We are unsure as to the precise meaning of For the rāma i jro vanua . The same expression is found in Demak Cd22 while a similar expression jro thāni is attested in Sima Anglayang (968 Śaka) 5v1, 5v2, 8r4. Cf. further Leiden ms. Or. 9378 (and Or. 10088) kunaṅ parnahanira i jro tani devapuja, homa vidi, buta bali, valikarma, ya-tanyan enaka paluṅguhnira riṅ patapanira . sīma , a purchase was made of land in the kabalan  as, or and a vluran to be a conduit for its water. The derived form That price of purchase by the Lord of Hañaṅan and the Lady Parhyaṅan was 1 pinanumbasakən is a benefactive form ( ). The word 57 vluran , apparently designating some kind of water works like a canal, is very rare. The only other helpful occurrences are in the Tiga Ron inscription of the time of Balitung. What is clear is that havannani is to be analyzed as havan-a-ni . See some similar expressions in the Muncang charter A47–48. suvarṇa  and 4 māṣa . It was made into a sīma without delay. The paṅrāma gift to the source of the water was 2 māṣa every year. There was land in the kakalaṅan to which the water of the vluran comes down, purchased for 2 māṣa . Its outer limit was 2 ḍpa . Those from whom the Lord and Lady of Hañaṅan bought it were saṅ Jeni and  saṅ Svaran. The word panumbasan is not recorded in OJED . We guess it means ‘person from whom one buys’ (cf. paṅajyan in the sense of ‘teacher’). The word also occurs in this meaning in Svayambhu §211–212. The status of the settlement  sīma at Masahar would be independent, not to be entered by the three high dignitaries — the Paṅkur, the Tavān, the Tirip — nor by the mānak vadihati , the makudur , the patih s, the vahuta s and all those who previously collected royal revenues, such as: the various Miśras, all types of occupational groups , the vulu-vulu paṅuraṅ , the kriṅ , the paḍam , the manimpiki , the paranakan , the limus galuh , the paṅaruhan , the taji , the vatu tajam , the sukun , the halu varak , the rakadut , the pinilai , the kataṅgaran , the tapa haji , the air haji , the malandaṅ , the ləca , the lab-əlab , the kalaṅkaṅ , the kutak , the taṅkil , the trəpan , the saluit , the master of commerce, the master of smiths, the maṅrumbai , the maṅguñjai , the master of the Nambi, the master of the Hañjaman, the master of gambling, the master of harlots, the pamaṇikan , the maṇiga , the sikəpan , the rumbān , the vilaṅ vanua , the viji kavah , the tiṅkəs , the māvī , the miśra hino , the vəli hapū , the vəli tambaṅ , the vəli pañjut , the vəli harəṅ , the paguluṅ , the pabisar , the urutan , the dampulan , the təpuṅ kavuṅ , the suṅsuṅ paṅuraṅ , the pasuk alas , the payuṅan , the sipat bilut , the paniṅ-aṅin , the pamāvaśya , the hopan , the turun-turun , the səkar tahun , the panusuh , the mahout, the eunuch, the healer, the singing actor, the sambal , the sumbul , the royal servants, at Masahar. Only the Deity in the holy devotional temple at  — such as:   mayaṅ tan pavuaḥ areca-blossom without betelnut  valū rumambat ri natar gourd vines that grow in the courtyard     mamijilakan vuriniṅ kikir producing the trace of a file  mamūk attacking in fury   the limit imposed on them, they will be subjected to levies by the claimants of all royal levies proportionally to the excess sa-uddhāra haji but taxation of the excess should not be disproportional . tan adhikāna At that time the Lord and Lady of Hañaṅan offered as token of obedience to the Great King:   suvarṇa of gold, 1 pair of vəḍihan tapis . To the Lord of Sirikan  called  pu Amaraindra, the Lord of Vka called  pu Balyaṅ, to both of the resident officials — the one of Maḍaṇḍar, the one of Aṅgəhan — and the Tiruan called Taritip were offered as gift: of 1 ḍa punta suvarṇa  and 4 māṣa of gold, 1 pair of vəḍihan tapis per person. The Amrāti Havaṅ Vicakṣaṇa, the Maṅhuri  called Paṇḍamuan, the Halaran called  pu Guṇottama, and the Paṅgil Hyaṅ called  pu Glo were offered as gift: 10 māṣa , 1 pair of vəḍihan cadar per person; the Susuhan called  pu Səsək, The term the Manuṅkuli susuhan is also observed in the Wulig charter (A3, A7). That charter concerns an order addressed to a samgat susuhan . However, the name of the samgat is not stated so it is unknown whether the susuhan here is the same person as the one addressed in the Wulig inscription. called  pu Udā, the Vadihati called  saṅ Dinakara and the Makudur called  pu Balavān were offered as gift: 1 suvarṇa  and 5 māṣa of gold, 1 pair of vəḍihan tapis per person. The terms used in this paragraph are in part unusual, particularly susuhan and manuṅkuli , although the latter is occasionally found in Central Javanese inscriptions. See Barrett Jones 89, 102 The 2 masters of Vadihati — the Mira-Mirah  called  saṅ Halaṅ Pahuṅ and the Halaran called  saṅ Ləbur Poh; the 2 masters of Makudur — the Vatu Valaiṅ called  saṅ ra Majha and  saṅ Təpusan — were given as gift: 10 māṣa , 1 pair of vəḍihan cadar each. The Paṅuraṅ of Vadihati  called  saṅ ra Vuṅū, the Manuṅgū called  saṅ Hovaṅka, the Manuṅgū of Makudur called  saṅ ra Kəbəl and the Manuṅgū called  saṅ Kulumpaṅ were given as gifts: 5 māṣa of gold, 1 pair of vəḍihan cadar per person. The masters of the court  : the overseer of pakaraṇān kanayakān for the king, the official of Gunuṅan called  pu Tuntun; The same figure also occurs in the overseer of junior troops Sangguran B3–4 ( juru (ka)[na](ya)kān· I hino samgat· guṇuṅan· pu tun·tun· ), and again in Gulung-Gulung B10, and in Jeru-Jeru A27–B1. called  saṅ ra Guyu; the overseer of kalula  called  pu Bali, the kaṇḍamuhi  called  ḍa punta Geṣṭa; the calligraphers called Nidhi and Prakāśa; the herald of Sirikan, of Hujuṅ Galuh, of Vka Viridih, of Kanuruhan called  saṅ Rokat; Cf.  Sangguran B4–5. the  heralds of Sbaṅ called  saṅ Vimala, of Sraṅan called  saṅ Satyaka, of Maḍaṇḍar called  saṅ Cakra, of Aṅgəhan called  saṅ Vidya, of Tiruan Sumuḍan, of Mamrāti called  saṅ Turuhan were given as gifts: 1 suvarṇa  and 4 māṣa of gold collectively. The calligraphers of Halu were given as gifts: 1  suvarṇa  and 4 māṣa of gold collectively; both patih juru s — the vasah  called  saṅ Kayu Matəb, the kuci  called  saṅ Buka — were given as gifts: 5 māṣa of gold, 1 pair of vəḍihan cadar each; their heralds, the Piṅsor Hyaṅ and the Paskaran, were given 2 māṣa  and 2 kupaṅ , 1 sheet of vəḍihan cadar each; the one departing to demarcate the land at Vadihati called  saṅ Hovaṅka and the one departing to demarcate the land at Makudur called  saṅ  pyan were given as gifts: 8 māṣa of gold, 1 pair of vəḍihan cadar each; the royal companions departing to demarcate called  saṅ ra Liṇḍiḥ and the Kahuripan were given as gifts: 8 māṣa of gold, one sheet of vəḍihan cadar each; the leader of those demarcating the sīma , the preceptor of Bəkal upādhyāya whose name, mentioned here only out of necessity is Māravijaya, was offered as gifts: 8 arthahetoḥ māṣa . The  piṅhai s who made preparations for clearing of wood and underbrush at Bavaṅ called  saṅ Toloboṅ and the piṅhai who made preparation for clearing at Paḍaṅ called  saṅ Kuṭa were given as gifts 1 suvarṇa  and 4 māṣa of gold, one sheet of vəḍihan tapis cloth each; the piṅhai lampuran , as a group , puṇḍuh The use of the word at Vaharu, Tāl Ḍua, and Mabuvur, puṇḍuh found three times in this paragraph does not have any exact parallels in other Old Javanese sources that we are aware of. The closest seems to be the extremely rare use of sapuṇḍuh that we find in only two inscriptions,  namely Mantyasih I (829 Śaka, 1r4 kvaiḥnikanaṁ patiḥ sapuṇḍuḥ ) and Canggu (1280 Śaka, 5r5–6 salvīraniṁ nāyaka, parttaya, Apiṅhe, Akurug·, Avajuḥ, vadihadi, sapuṇḍuḥnya kabeḥ ). See OJED  puṇḍuh ‘bunch, collection, group?’. The toponym  mabuvur is also observed in B28 and in two other charters, namely Pabuharan (2v5) and Canggu (5r2). namely Baruṇa, Śikha, Usī, Tarikha, Lepe and Loka, were given as gifts: 2 suvarṇa  and 8 māṣa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan ragi per person; the piṅhai , as a group, at Siguṇuṅ Manuruṅ and Kagəsaṅan, namely Maṅuṇḍuh, Gaṇḍut, Mārga and Kuṇḍu, were given as gifts 2 suvarṇa  and 8 māṣa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan ragi each; the piṅhai , as a group, at Malaṅgat, namely master Boceṅ, Utaṅ, Bajra, Manujendra, Sātha, Tabəh, Surāni, Dhaneṣṭi, Bañjir ḍa puṅku and Jaya, were given as gifts: 2 suvarṇa  and 8 māṣa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan ragi each; the herald of the piṅhai was given as gift: 4 māṣa , one sheet of vəḍihan ragi . The  vahuta s who made preparations for clearing of wood and underbrush at Bavaṅ Mapapan, namely Cakuṭa, Kasugihan, Burīn and Maṇḍamu, were given as gifts: 1 suvarṇa  and 4 māṣa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan ragi cloth each; the vahuta lampuran  called Vagal, Cetra, Lumpat, Bodhi, Ginu, Ślut, Nakā, Sūṅan, Samayī, Baracah, Gunuṅ, Pindi, Purul and Huraṅ, were given as gift: 1 suvarṇa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan ragi per person; the vahuta s of Paḍaṅ and Pagəruyuṅ called Geṣṭa, Labdha, Cetrī, satū, Horambat, Sumukha, Kaṅah, Gamaka, Śikhara, Jalutū, Ləpas, Tuṅga, Maṅu ir, Lajur and Koṭor were given as gifts: 6 suvarṇa  and 8 māṣa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan kāruka per person; the vahuta s who made preparations for clearing of wood and underbrush at Vsi-vsi called Baya , Gugagas and Bhuvi were given as gifts: 6 suvarṇa  and 8 māṣa of gold collectively, one sheet of vəḍihan kāruka per person. The  rāma s of neighboring villages participating as witnesses at the sīma demarcation:  from Vurarai, the  vinəkas  called  saṅ Pārtha, father of Sotan; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Ḍivut from Mājha, the  vinəkas  called  si Surah, father of Handaruan; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Pkan, father of Gəgəan from Cuguī, the  vinəkas  called  si Garah, father of Bindyaṅ; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Sandu, father of Pañji from Tiriṅ, the  vinəkas  called  si Sugəṅ, father of Su sī; the overseer of Kalaṅs called Papəṅ, father of Rod from Ləmah Tulis,  si Suradeva, father of Balai, and?  si Sulya from Marsmu, the  vinəkas  called  si Racuk, father of Baṅhək; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Vavul, father of  Pa san from Aṅgit, the  vinəkas  called  si Pātra, father of Magum; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Giḍuh, father of Baman from Mabuvur, the  vinəkas  called  si Sukət, father of Agra; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Kali from Muṅga, the  vinəkas  called  si Khadi, father of Maṅrah; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Piṅul, father of Cama from Ḍaḍaṁ, the  vinəkas  called  si Catu, father of Buhak; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Uḍik, father of Burat from Paḍaṅ, the  vinəkas  called  si Kubul, father of Ruma ; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Ḍaṅah, father of Padma from Rambai, the senior kabayan  called Sāmbaśā i, the vinəkas  called  si Bañjar, father of Lañcaṅ and  si Kaṇḍi, father of Aṇḍur; the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Raddiṅ from Tuvuṅ, the  vinəkas  called  si Luka, father of Yukti from Jayamukha, the  vinəkas  called  si Taḍah, father of , Rambai, the overseer of Kalaṅs called Vuravan, father of Panahilan and  si Duṅut father of ñcah from Panammuan, the  vinəkas  called  si lka, father of Kurantil from Hantaña, the vinəkas  called  si  They were given as gifts: 8 māṣa of gold per village, one sheet of vəḍihan ragi per person. From Masahar, the overseer of Kalaṅs called  si Śvaran was given  You, o gods, should kill him! Your approach when you kill him should be without looking back, not looking to the side, clash with the opponent, slap his left side, attack anew his right side, cut down his snout, split his skull, rip open his belly, stretch out his intestines, draw out his entrails, tear out his liver, eat his flesh, drink his blood, without delay finish off, bring to an end his life. If he goes to the forest, may he be eaten up by the tiger, bitten by the snake, whirled round and round by divine wrath! If he goes to the field, may he be caught by thunderclap, may his head be torn off by demons, may he be eaten by the Pamuṅvan giants! Therefore, let him suffer the consequences! Please you gods Kuśika, Garga, Metrī, Kuruṣya and Pātañjala, guardian of the North, guardian of the South, West, East, throw  him in the air, tear him asunder (?) among all gods, throw him into the great ocean, drown him at the dam! May he be caught by deities in the water! May he be pulled by sea-monsters! May he be snatched by the crocodile! May it be there that he dies, the lawless man who dissolves the paddy-field land sīma settlement as Masahar! After the  makudur had pronounced the invocation, they all changed clothes. They all sat in the təkan pasək  or: ‘for the coming of the gifts’? , following the order of those who are present in the capacity of patih , vahuta , headman of kabayān as well as headman of neighboring villages, seniors, juniors, men, women. No one was left behind in taking part in feasting on the assembly ground manaḍah : pagəlaran  The total of vegetables being regaled,  being offered dressed-up rice  ? , skul dāndānan being ladled  : hinirusan  cooked foods  , kəla-kəla snacks  , ambil-ambil  kasyan ,  lit-lit ,  tlu sānak , roasted food  , saṅa-saṅān  rumba-rumbah ,  kuluban ,  tetis ,  tumpuk-tumpuk , unsalted dried meat  , ḍeṁ hañaṅ salted dried meat  , ḍeṁ hasin  kakap  fish , shrimps  , huraṅ  biluṅluṅ  fish ,  kavan  fish ,  rumahan  fish ,  hala-hala , eggs  being relaxed with liquor  , beans suṇḍa , milk, atak tahulan  fishbones? See occurrences in Paradah I and Paradah II . Cf. van Naerssen of the 60 Watukura A inscription. Cf. Matusyama. eaten with banana core as vegetables haryas per gaṅan banana leaf was ten, apart from the varieties of fish and small game . They all feasted to heart’s content kənas , drinking yathāsukha sīdhu , ciñca , tuak three times per person. They were fortified with side dishes and given condiments tambul , dates kuravu ? , tamarind kurima  asam and  dodol as desert ? . Side by side, they took drinks inañjapan , while offering unguents malarih and flowers ? . The jənu səkar tuvuṅ player played. They all stood up, starting with the counselors . They all paid their respects facing wherever the Great King found himself. patih


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 3: DHARMA_INSIDENKMunggut.xml
Title: Munggut charter (944 Śaka)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: maṅhuri|homa|nakṣatra|vāra|pūjā|hyang|mantra|sīma|karāman|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
   Front main part  . . . svasti śaka-vārṣătīta 944 cetrā-masa tithi caturdaśī kr̥ ṣ ṇa -pakṣa, vu , pa , Aṁ , vāra, balamuki, kr̥tikā raṇa -nakṣatra, dahana-devatā, Āyu ṣ m ān· yoga, vanija-kāraṇa, Irikā divāsanyājñā śrī mahārāja  rake halu, śrī loke ś va ra  dharmmavaṅśa Airlaṅgănantavikramottuṅgadeva, tinaḍah rakryān· mahāmantrī hino śrī saṁgrā mavijayaprasādottuṅgadevī, Umiṅsor· I rakryān· paḍaṁ pu dvija, kumonakən ikanaṁ karāmā n· Iṁ muṅgut· sapasuk thāni kab ḥ tka ri babadnya, a e maṅaran· Aṇḍu  k ·, bara, marma, cucya, g eḍoḥ, bə c əm·, bajəm·, buṅaḥ, dītən·, bijo, kuniṁ, kəmbaṁ, kilano, gajusa, tiṅgal· , gantar· li ṇḍuṁ, R̥mban·, tuñjuṁ, do, marum·, beca, vecuṁ, kuruk· lca, bəntəL̥, R̥ntap· ba hum a n·, robhana, Ibuni ran·, ma ṅaran· ḍə r ən·, gosəṁ, plī, kleṁ, bavvat·, godhanā, ṅ itam·, ba sakaṁ, garuṁ, Aṣṭamī, Adinəm·, śoḍagañciṁ, bamī, Aṣṭi, paraḥ, śrīnam·, Iṅgut·, vatəhər·, ḍintə n· jenī, gr̥ ha, dhā ryya, kesar·, nadī Untal·, b ənər·, Uṅabakaḍut·, lu tilaya, sabh ā mogha, gə ḍe, bayog·, ḍaL̥ man·, maraṇa, daḍatañjamī, surat·, pagəḥ, śrĭmato, Iyo, tuvuḥ, kuniṁ, nikiṁ lekəm·, mūlū, sabotī, boḍatəm·, pənəd·, kejī, kedranī, patyən·, bhuvana ṇī, rimpiṁ, godr̥sa, Ajum·, dhəti , hambəṁ, sadī, vulu karaman·, patṅahan· rapiḥ, Akə  mbaṁ tr̥piṁ, Abūbū ḥ Au ḍi, Atahun·, gosatəm·, pañarikan· sudvinəm· , saṁkuba, landə so ḍ i, gəvəg·, bhuvaṇa, bata, madoti, A mpaṁ, galuḥ, baṣūddha, jujul·, sulu r ·, vinkas· bagnalo, makādi kabayān· kāliḥ maṅaran· japo, vvātan·, madamlakna saṁ hyaṅ ā  jñā haji prasāsti pa gə -pagəḥ tinaṇḍa garuḍamukha kmitananya, sambandha, Ikanaṁ karāmān· I mu  ṅgut· sapasuk thāni kabeḥ, masamāgrī mapuluṁ rahi manambaḥ I taṇḍa rakryān· ri pakira kiran· makabehan·, karuhun· I lbū ri pāduka śrī mahārāja makārasa maṁhyaṅā nugraha I pāduka śrī mahārāja, I knohanya makmitana saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji tina Back main part ṇḍa ga ruḍam u kha, ma karasa, An· su m ĭma thāninya I muṅgut·, kumabhaktyan i ra buyut· s ū kṣma An iddhākna drabya haji paṅaṣṭaṅgī mā  5 Aṅkən· katiga māsa, meriṅa sarvvavija lima sukat· riṁ savulu, kaharan· puṣpapañcopacāra, t la-t ī i la, dhŭpa, dīpa, gandha, mvaṁ nivedyādi prakāra, pū e ai jāknanyăṁkən· katiga māsa, mvaṁ tan·tunya I saprakārani  ṁ maṅilala drabya hajī vulu-vulu magəṁ maḍmit· kabeḥ, paṅkur·, tavan· tirip· ṅuniveḥ sakveḥ saṁ maṅilala vulu-vulu riṁ daṅū, makădiṁ miśra, paramiśra, paṅuraṁ kriṁ, paḍəm· manimpiki pa ranakan·, limus· galuḥ maṁriñca, maṁhuri, paraṁ, suṅka, dhūra, sukun·, sinagiha, kyab· liṅgaṁ, sr̥kan·, halu vara k·, rakadut·, ramanaṅ s va ra gəṇḍiṁ, piniṁlai, kataṅgaran·, tapa haji, Air haji, malandaṁ, lca, lablab·, pakalaṅkaṁ, kutak· taṅkil·, tr̥pan·, salyut·, vatu valaṁ, pamanikan·, maniga, sikpan·, rumban·, tirvan·, vilaṁ thāni, viji kavaḥ, tiṅkə s·, māvī, manambaṅi, taṁhiran·, tuha dagaṁ, juru gosalī, maṁrumbai, maṁguñjai, tuh ambi, juru juḍi, juru jalir·, pabisa an ān n r· paguluṁ, pavuṁkunuṁ, vli hapū, vli harR̥ṁ, vli pañjut·, palamak·, Urutan·, dampulan·, tpuṁ kavuṁ, suṁsuṁ paṅuraṁ, pasuk a las·, tikəl· haṅgas·, sipad vilut· jukuṁ, paniṅ-aṅin·, pamavasya, hopan·, panrāṅan·, skār tahun·, paba yai  paṁ rā ma, tuluṁ hutaṁ, pobhaya, pacumbi, paprăyaścita, kḍi, valyan·, sambal·, sumbul·, hulun· haji, jəṅgi, siṅgaḥ, pamr̥ṣi, mavuluṁ-vuluṁ, vatək i jro Ityevamādi kabeḥ, tan tamā ta ya Irikanaṁ sīma I muṅgut· kevalā Ikanaṁ ka rāman· I muṅgut· juga pramāṇa I ri kā, maṅkana Ikanaṁ sukhaduḥkha magə:ṁ maḍmit· ka  beḥ, kady aṅgāniṁ mayaṁ tan· pavvaḥ, valū rumambat iṁ natar·, vipati , vaṅke kabunan·, rāḥ kasavur iṁ dalan·, duhilatən·, sāhasa, vākcapala, hastacapala, mamijilakən· vuriniṁ kikir·, mamuk· mamumpaṁ lūdan·, tūtan·, Aṅśa, pratyaṅśa, ḍəṇḍa kuḍəṇḍa, maṇḍihalādi prakāra, Ann ikanaṁ karāman· I muṅgut· A ta pramāṇā Irikā, maṅkana ra  sa  s aṁ hyaṁ ājñā hajī kmitanikanaṁ karāman· I muṅgut·, sapasuk· ṣīma kabeḥ mvaṁ ri vnaṅanikanaṁ vargga mūla sīma I muṅgut· mapadagaṅa, lvīranya, Atitiḥ rvaṁ siki, Alavay· rvaṁ siki, A ba sa na rvaṁ siki, Acămara rvaṁ siki, Aṅuñjal· rvaṁ siki, Aṅavari rvaṁ siki, Amaṁmaṁ rvaṁ siki, A muti-muti  rvaṁ siki, paṇḍay· mās· rvaṁ siki, paṇḍay· vsi rvaṁ siki, paṇḍay· tāmra rvaṁ siki, paṇḍay· kaṅśa rvaṁ siki, Amutər· rvaṁ siki, Apa rahu rvaṁ siki, Adagaṁ sapi rvaṁ siki, Aṅulaṁ kbo rvaṁ siki, pa ram· Right main part ma s an· rvaṁ siki, mabakulan· rvaṁ siki, ma səpahan· rvaṁ siki, ma hī ṣṭhva n· rvaṁ siki, samaṅkana I ka naṁ karma dagaṁ salviranikanaṁ na  ṁ bha ṇḍa pamvatanya, tamola  h ata ḥ paṅa sthāna Irikanaṁ sī ma I muṅgut· A nn ikanaṁ varga mūla sīma I muṅgut· Ata ḥ v āsa-pra māṇa manahi la na ya drabya haji tuhun· maveha patūt· pa dulur· juga marayan· mareṁ ⌈ deśa salen· mvaṁ yan· pame t· dval·, maṅkanātaḥ Ikanaṁ varga  kilalan·, kliṁ, Ăryya, siṁhala, ⌈ g olaviṣaya, coli ka , malyāla, ka rṇnăṭaka, vallahāra, cəmpa, R̥mən·, havaṁ, mambaṁ, huñjəman·, senămu kha, varahan·, mapaḍahi, ke ñ caka ,  tarimba, mat kan·, Aba⌈ u p u apu ñol·, salahan· varga kila lan·, Asiṁ samakavarga ya, A siṁ pravr̥tinya, sadeśa-saṁka na nya , yāvat ya muṅgu Irikeṁ sīma I muṅgut·, An ikanaṁ varga mūla sī ma I muṅgut· Atikā pramāṇa I sukhaduḥkhanya magəṁ maḍmit· ka beḥ, tumūtak na yacānyayan i ka masthānabati ri sājñānya mapa knā tambəhani pamūjanya, buyut· śūkṣma, maṁkana rasany anugraha śrī  mahāraja, Irikanaṁ varga mūla sīma I muṅgut· sapasuk ṣīma kabeḥ kapagəhaknanyan· tamolaḥ I pana taranya sovaṁ-sovaṁ tan· kolah-ulaha de sa ṅ a nāgata pra bhu, mvaṁ saṅ anāgata vineḥ tiṁha Left main part  l· piṁhay ·, ma katə vəka   śrī ma h ārāja ri maṇiratnasi ṅhāsa na makaḍatvan· vvatan mās· ,  yapvan· hana sira kamatan· tan· yatnā I sara sa ny ājñā śrĭ ma hāraja, Umulah-ulaḥ Ikeṁ sīma I muṅgut·, ya saṅkāna ni pramādanya, salvirani la ṅgha na ri saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji lviranya knāna ya nigraha mā  kā  1  su  5 Īndaḥ ta kita bhaṭāra śrī  haricandana, Agasti, mahārṣ i , pūrbva, dakṣiṇa, paścima, Uttarā gneya , neriti, băyabya, Urd dhva ma dhaḥ raviḥ śaśi kṣiti jala pavana hutāsana ya ja māṇākāśa, A horătra sandhyā, nāgarāja durgă devī, sahananta hyaṁ kālamr̥tyu yama baruṇa kuvera bāsava ki ta masuki manarĭrerika vva ṁ sa r va siddha rikiṁ jagat·, yāvat· bhaṅ gi  gaṇa-gaṇa vna ṅa , Umulah-ulaḥ I keṁ sīma I muṅgut· patyanantā ya kamuṁ hyaṁ śŭkṣma, deyantat· pa tīya, ta t· to liha ri vuntat· ta iṅhala ri likuran·, taruṁ riṅ adga t t t n·, tampyal· I hiriṅan·, tutu ḥ tuṇḍanya, blaḥ kapālanya, carika kan· vtaṅnya, vtvakə n daL̥manya, pa ṅan dagiṁnya, Inum· rāḥnya vkasakə n· pranantika, yan pare ṅ alas· paraniṁ moṁ sa  Back: Additional lines at top   sa mb ə R̥n i ṁ glap·, puliraknaniṁ devamanyu  Right upper part  (p)ināna  bhraṣṭa lipu  tan· sva   piṁpitu A ta yan· bimba n· pāpāta sajīvakāla, maṁ kana tmahananikeṁ vvaṁ Anyāya Um u lah-ula ḥ Ik eṁ sīma I mu   Front Additional lines at top  rva ṁ  977 kā la  sa ṁ hadyan· j ujul· sulur· kabayan·  Front Additional line at bottom  guve Ubena giditikəm·, cacəm·, ṅayai

--- TRANSLATION ---
  Hail! Elapsed Śaka year 944, month of Caitra, fourteenth  tithi , waning fortnight, Vurukuṅ, Pahiṅ, Tuesday, the Vuku being Balamuki, lunar mansion Kr̥ttikā, the deity Dahana i.e., Agni , On the use of synonyms for deity names, see Gomper ( the conjunction Āyuṣmān, the ). 101–103 10 karaṇa Vaṇija. That was the time when the decree of the Great King, the Lord of  Halu, Śrī Lokeśvara Dharmavaṅśa Airlaṅga Anantavikramottuṅgadeva, was received by the Lady rakai , i.e. rakryān i the Great Minister of Hino rakryān named Śrī Saṅgrāmavijayaprasādottuṅgadevī. It came down to the Lord of Paḍaṅ named  pu Dvija. It gave an order with regard to the community in Muṅgut including all its constituent villages up to its sapasuk thāni forest clearings. The expression sapasuk thāni (which might also be translated ‘including all its village
inhabitants’) occurs again in 1.19, but is then changed to sapasuk sīma in 2.18 and 3.32. Evidently, the change in terminology from thāni to sīma is a direct consequence of the grant recorded in lines 1.18 to 2.4.  The inhabitants were named: Aṇḍuk, Bara, Marma, Cucya, Geḍoh, Bəcəm, Bajəm, Buṅah, Dītən, Bijo, Kuniṅ, Kəmboṅ, Kilano, Gajusa, Tiṅgal, Gantar, Liṇḍuṅ, Rəmban, Tuñjuṅ, ... do, Marum, Beca, Vecuṅ, Kuruk Ləca, Bəntələ, Rəntap Bahuman, Robhana, the mother of Ran named Ḍərən, Gosəṅ, Pəlī, Kəleṅ, Bavvat, Godhanā, Ṅitam, Basakaṅ, Garuṅ, Aṣṭamī, Adinəm, Śoḍagañciṅ, Bamī, Aṣṭi, Parah, Śrīnam, Iṅgut, Vatəhər, Ḍintən Jenī, The name Dintən stands so close to the right end of the front face that even its final consonant and virāma cannot be read with confidence. It is imaginable that the scribe, had space been sufficient, would have inserted a comma between this name and Jenī at the beginning of the next line — in other words, that we are dealing with two names and not one. Gr̥ha, Dhārya, Kesar, Nadī, Untal, Bənər, Uṅabakaḍut, Lutilaya, Sabhāmogha, Gəḍe, Bayog, Ḍaləman, Maraṇa, Daḍatañjamī, Surat, Pagəh, It is tempting to see in the words Śrīmato, Iyo, Tuvuh, Kuniṅ, Niki, Gokəm, Mūlū, Sabotī, Boḍatəm, Pənəd, Kejī, Kedranī, Patyən, Bhuvanaṇī, Rimpiṅ, Godrəsa, Ajum, Dhəti, Hambəṅ, Sadī. surat pagəḥ some kind of expression introducing a short list of names, but the punctuation of the text rather suggests that the words are themselves also names rather than common nouns in this context. The community occupational groups  : *vulu  patṅahan s:106 Rapih,AkəmbaṅTrəpiṅ,AbūbuhAuḍi,Atahun,Gorsatəm. scribes  : Sudvinəm,Saṅkuba, Landəsoḍi, Gəvəg, Bhuvaṇa,
Bata, Madoti, Ampaṅ, Galuh, Baṣūddha, Jujul, Sulur. pañarikan  vinəkas : Bagnalo. in the first place the two chiefs named Japo kabayan and Vvātan.  The order was that they should make the holy royal decree in the form of an edict as confirmatory document sealed with the Garuḍa-face, to be kept in custody. The occasion: the community in Muṅgut including all its constituent villages, all together took counsel with and paid homage to all high functionaries of the council  , taṇḍa rakryān ri pakira-kirān Boechari ( [but] in the first place to His Majesty the Great King, having as purpose to beg His Majesty the Great King for the grant that it would be proper ; 57 ; 126 ) has suggested that the 75, 109 taṇḍa rakryān pakira-kirān are first mentioned in the Kediri period, but he seems to have overlooked the occurrence in the Adulengen inscription which was known to him as Kakurugan. They also occur in Sima Anglayang 4v7 and 13r4. The phrase for them to keep in custody a holy royal decree sealed with the Garuḍa-face, having as substance to make the village of Muṅgut into a maṅhyaṅ ri knohanya occurs also in Cane Ab.24–26: maṁhyaṁ ri knohanya sumīma thāninya I cane, sīma karāmān·, phalānyan· prasiddha sāra, pinakapanpi kulvan·, maṅkana rasani panambaḥ, nikanaṁ karāmān· I cane sapaśuk thāni tka ri babadnya, kunaṁ saṅkā ri gə:ṁnyānumoda śrī mahārāja ri sapaṁhyaṁnikanaṅ karāmān· I cane . Related passages with the keyword knoh are also found in Turun Hyang A4 and Bularut C14. sīma , worshiping the invisible ancestors *buyut sūkṣma We have difficulty understanding the syntax of the words  kumabhaktyanira buyut sūkṣma (and the reading is also slightly uncertain for the first word), so our translation is only approximative. and yielding royal revenue in the form of paṅaṣṭaṅgi tax worth 5 māṣa every third month, to be accompanied with five sukat of all grain-crops sarvavīja See from every occupational group, as though they were a fivefold service with flowers — oil of sesame seed, incense, lamp, fragrance, and also diverse food offering — to be used by it Sukhamerta 10v6 mvaṁ sarvvavĭja, śveta rakta pīta kr̥ṣṇa, sukat·, 5, sovaṁ, Aṅkən tahun . Cf. also, within the corpus of Airlangga inscriptions, the expression sarvvaphala mūlaphala found in Baru Cf8; Kusambyan B31–32; and Sima Anglayang 17r4. i.e., by the village for worship every third month. This is a very interesting passage, which rather beautifully compares the five sukat of sarvavīja to be collected from the vulu s to the five constituents ( tīlatela, dhūpa, dīpa, gandha, nivedya ) of a so called pañcopacārapūjā ‘worship in five services’. The presence of the element puṣpa is a bit difficult. The same expression occurs in Kusambyan A28, but there without metaphorical meaning. Note also the offerings made in the Bimalasrama charter (3.1–2, emended kaharan· mantranamaskārā parṇnaḥ dhūpadīpagandhākṣatā pamūjā mpuṅku muntun· ri bhaṭārĭ prajñāpāraramitā ) and in the Baharasrama charter of the time of Daksa (1v11–12 vras· caturvvarṇna kukusan· 1 Iṁ savulu-savulu‚ piṇḍa kukusan· 4 vavānya matə  hər·  ). sarbvaphalapha li bras· caturvvarṇna vavānya And the fixed rule  regarding all kinds of people who collect tantu maṅilala That the term royal revenue from the occupational groups, big or small — the Paṅkur, the Tavan, the Tirip —, particularly all those who previously had a claim on the occupational groups, beginning with the various Miśras, the Paṅuraṅ, the Kriṅ, the Paḍəm, the Manimpiki, the Paranakan, the Limus Galuh, the Maṅriñca, the Maṅhuri, the Paraṅ, the Suṅka, the Dhūra, the Sukun, the Sinagiha, the Kyab, the Liṅgaṅ, the Sr̥kan, the Halu Varak, the Rakadut, the Ramanaṅ, the Svara Gəṇḍiṅ, the Piniṅlai, the Kataṅgaran, the Tapa Haji, the Air Haji, the Malandaṅ, the Lca, the Lablab, the Pakalaṅkaṅ, the Kutak, the Taṅkil, the Trəpan, the Salyut, the Vatu Valaṅ, the Pamanikan, the Maniga, the Sikpan, the Rumban, the Tirvan, the Vilaṅ Thāni, the Viji Kavah, the Tiṅkəs, the Māvī, the Manambaṅi, the Taṅhiran, the Tuha Dagaṅ, the Juru Gosalī, the Maṅrumbai, the Maṅguñjai, the overseer of the Nambi, the overseer of gambling, the overseer of prostitutes, the Pabisar, the Paguluṅ, the Pavuṅkunuṅ, the Vli Hapū, the Vli Harəṅ, the Vli Pañjut, the Palamak, the Urutan, the Dampulan, the Tpuṅ Kavuṅ, the Suṅsuṅ Paṅuraṅ, the Pasuk Alas, the Tikəl Haṅgas, maṅilala is to be understood more or less in this sense is shown by the use of the word maminta in the parallel passage of Adulengen (3r3). This use of maminta , instead of the ubiquitous maṅilala , has no precise parallel anywhere in the Airlangga corpus, but may be compared with the sentence An· tan deyən ata kāminta tinuṇḍa right after the list of maṅilala dravya haji in Sima Anglayang 17v5. And we find the precise phrase maminta drabya haji in the Barsahan plate (r6), which we are inclined to date to the period between the reigns of Balitung and Airlangga: tan· tamā ta ya maminta drabya haji vulu-vulu Irikeṁ sīma I barsahan· . The same phraseology was already in use under King Daksa, as appears from Timbanan Wungkal (14) nahan (pra)kārani tan tumamā maminta drabya haji . See also pinta-pintan in Kubu-kubu (4v1) and Hantang (A20). Cf. the the Sipad Vilut, the Jukuṅ, the Paniṅaṅin, the Pamavasya, the Hopan, the Panrāṅan, the Skar Tahun, the Pabayai, the Paṅrāma, the Tuluṅ Hutaṅ, the Pobhaya, the Pacumbi, the Paprāyaścitta, the eunuch, the healer, the Sambal, the Sumbul, the royal servants, the Jəṅgi, patikəl (h)aṅgas whom we find mentioned in the Balambangan , Garaman , Kudadu and Balawi inscriptions. On the term the Siṅgah, the Pamr̥ṣi, the Mavuluṅ-vuluṅ, all of the courtiers, and so forth — jəṅgi , see . is that they shall not enter the sīma at Muṅgut. It is only the community in Muṅgut that has the exclusive authority over it. Likewise are all the  fines to be imposed for ‘pain and relief ’ , sukha-duḥkha On the great or small — ‘areca-blossom without betelnut’ sukha-duḥkha , see Boechari ( 14–15 ): “ 39–41, esp. p. 40 sukhaduḥkha bukanlah ‘suka dan duka’, melainkan diterangkan dengan hala hayu , ialah segala perbuatan yang buruk dan yang baik yang terjadi dalam masyarakat, atau seperti yang dimaksudkan di dalam setiap prasasti, yang terjadi dalam lingkungan daerah perdikan. Bahkan sebenarnya hanya perbuatan yang jahat saja yang dimaksudkan. Dengan perkataan lain, sukhaduḥkha ialah segala tindak pidana (yang terjadi di dalam lingkungan daerah perdikan) yang harus dikenai hukuman denda.” Boechari seems to allude to a normative text that gave the explanation hala hayu , but we have not yet been able to identify the text in question. For translations of the individual terms, see Boechari 1986: 161–162 / 2012: 309–310; see also Boechari 2012: 510 for an English translation of a sukha-duḥkha passage. We adopt the interpretation of the term sukha-duḥkha itself, and of the meanings of the items in the following list, from work in progress by Timothy Lubin. , ‘gourd vines that grow in the courtyard’ mayaṅ tan pavvaḥ , ‘disaster’ valū rumambat iṅ natar , ‘a corpse covered with dew’ vipati , ‘blood spattered on the road’ vaṅke kabunan , ‘slander’ rāh kasavur iṅ dalan , ‘violence’ duhilatən , ‘rash speech’ sāhasa , ‘rash acts with the hand’ vākcapala , ‘producing the dust of a file’ hastacapala , ‘attacking in fury’ mamijilakən vuriniṅ kikir , ‘rape’ mamuk , ‘repeated attack’ mamuṅpaṅ , ‘following’ ludan , ‘apportioning of shares’ tūtan , ‘punishment and wrongful punishment’ haṅśa pratyaṅśa , ‘poisons of all sorts’ ḍəṇḍa kuḍəṇḍa and such like — namely that only the community in Muṅgut has the authority over all of them. maṇḍihala Such was the substance of the holy decree of the king kept in custody by the community in Muṅgut including all its  subsidiary  sīma s. And as for the entitlements of the inhabitants of the original sīma at Muṅgut Or do the words to have shops, sapasuk· ṣīma kabeḥ mvaṁ ri vnaṅanikanaṁ vargga mūla sīma I muṅgut· rather mean ‘including all its sīma inhabitants. And as for the entitlements of the original inhabitants of the sīma at Muṅgut’? Several occurrences of the parallel phrase vargga mūla sīma I kusambyan· are found in the Kusambyan charter, to which we turn below. We find it perhaps slightly more likely that mūla goes with sīma than with vargga , in view of combinations like mūla savah , mūla təgal , mūla kaḍatvan in OJ literature, although the notion of ‘original inhabitant’ ( varga mūla ) also seems very plausible, and can be compared to the arguments advanced by protagonist Dhanadī in the Wurudu Kidul inscription (844 Śaka) that she was a true local and not a Khmer, hence not an descendant of ‘unfree’ or ‘taxable’ inhabitants. these include for instance: two vendors of titih , two vendors of yarn, two vendors of cloth, two vendors of fly-whisks , two porters, two cāmara awar-awar preparers, two conjurors ? , two amaṅmaṅ amuti-muti  ? , two goldsmiths, two ironsmiths, two bronze smiths, two coppersmiths, two amutər  churners? potters? , two boatmen, two cow traders, two buffalo buyers, two parəmasan , two retailers, two * pasəpahan , two mahīṣṭhvan . Such were the ... of the traders ... all of the varieties of ... of the goods that they transport * . pamvatan Unceasing, indeed, is  their residence * in the paṅasthāna sīma at Muṅgut, insofar as inhabitants of the original sīma at Muṅgut alone have power and authority * to weigh the royal revenues, although they shall still allow vaśa-pramāṇa others? the revenue collectors? to maintain harmony side by side * , so that patūt padulur they go to other regions and so that they seek wares. deśa * salen Only the following are the inhabitants from whom revenue may be collected: the South Indians  , the North Indians kliṅ , the Singhalese, those from the Gauḍa-territory ārya * , those from the Cola country gola-viṣaya * , those from Kerala colika , those from Karṇāṭaka, from the Rāṣṭrakūṭa-territory malyāla * , vallahāra The term Vallahāra, along with several other of the terms for foreigners figuring here, is also found in the (post-Airlangga) those from Campā, the Mons Sumengka charter of 981 Śaka. For discussion, see §7. Through which networks the term became known in Java is a fascinating question for further research. , the Havaṅs, the Mambaṅs, the Huñjəmans, the Senāmukhas, the Varahans, the drummers rəmən , the Kecakas, the dancers mapaḍahi , the Tapuk performers, the comedians tarimba , the *Salahans. abañol They are the inhabitants from whom revenue may be collected, to whatever group they belong, whatever be their activity, whatever be their country of origin, as long as they reside in that sīma at Muṅgut, whereas the inhabitants of the original an sīma at Muṅgut alone have the authority over all of its atikā payments for ‘pain and relief’, great or small, following ... ? its entire decree, intended to further its worship of the invisible ancestors yacānyayan ika masthānabati . buyut sūkṣma Such was the substance of the grant of the Great King, to the inhabitants of the original  sīma at Muṅgut including all its subsidiary  sīmas . It is to be considered by them as irrevocable, as long as  they remain in their respective domains an . panataran , * natar The sentence is not explicit as to who or what remains ( It is not to be disturbed by future kings or by those who in the future will be granted tamolah ). The very close parallel passages in Cane Cd23–24 (quoted in our lexicographic notes under panataran) and Kusambyan Tiṅhal Piṅhai, beginning with the Great King on the Gem-Jewel Lion-throne who has Vvatan Mās as royal residence the status of i.e., Airlangga . If there are ones seen not to be diligent with regard to the whole of the intent of the Great King’s decree, disturbing the  sīma at Muṅgut, it will become the cause of their guilt of negligence. The phrase All forms of transgression of the holy royal decree, whatever kind, will be subjected to a fine in gold of 1 ya saṅkānani pramādanya is a formulaic expression occurring also in several other inscriptions of this period. See the parallels cited in our n. 96 above, as well as Anjatan 4r9 yathānya tan pamuhara pramāda magə:ṁ I sira . kāṭi and 5 suvarṇa . Pay heed, you Lord Śrī Haricandana, Great Sage Agasti;  gods of the directions East, South, West, North, Southeast, Southwest, Northwest, The Northeast has been omitted in the text. Zenith, Nadir; (the eight forms of Śiva, which are) Sun, Moon, Earth, Water, Wind, Fire, Sacrificer, Ether; day and night, transitional times ; the king of the Nāgas; the goddess Durgā; all of you gods of Time and Death, Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, Vāsava sandhyā i.e., Indra , you who penetrate and take bodily form in all people who have supernatural powers in the world: if arrogantly , wildly bhaṅgi they will be able to disturb the gaṇa-gaṇa sīma at Muṅgut, let them be killed by you, the invisible gods * . In killing, your approach shall be that you do not look to the rear, do not look to the side, while clashing with the opponent. Slap buyut sūkṣma his side, cut his snout, split his skull, rip open his belly, draw out his entrails, eat his flesh, drink his blood, leave the dead one behind. When going to the forest, may he be eaten by a tiger, ... . let him be struck by thunderclap, whirled around by the anger of the gods ... ruined ... no less than seven times. When he is given shape, it will only be a bad one as long as he lives! Such will be the consequence for the delinquent man who disturbs the sīma at Mu ṅgut ... 977 was the time the honorable  Jujul saṅ hadyan and Sulur were chiefs . kabayan This seems to be additional information about two persons mentioned in 1.16.


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 4: DHARMA_INSIDENKAlasantan.xml
Title: Alasantan
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: maṅhuri|homa|nakṣatra|samudra|vāra|samgat|sīma|śapatha|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
     1 .  .  . namo 'stu ṣad-vināyakāya .  .  . svastī śaka-varṣātīta  861 bhadravāda-māsa, tithi pañcami kr̥ṣṇa-pakṣa, vā , pa , śu , vāra, Aśvinī-nakṣatra, Aśvī-devatā, vi ṣkambha-yoga, Irikā divasani Ājñā śrī mahārāja rakai halu dyaḥ siṇḍok· śrī Īśānavikrama, tinaḍaḥ rakryān· mapatiḥ I halu dyaḥ sahasra Umiṅsor· I samga  t· kanuruhan· pūdā, kumonnakan· Ikaṁ lmaḥ varuk· ryy ālasantan· vatək· bavaṁ mapapan· . sīmān· rakryān· kabayā n· Ibu rakryā n· mapatiḥ I halu dyaḥ sahasra kvaiḥ nya tampaḥ 13 bheda saṅkā riṁ pomahan· kəbuAn·-kəbuAn· pamli Iriya kā  12 dumu Al· Ikaṁ lmaḥ rāma ryy ālasantan· sapasug banuA, pratyekanikaṁ rā  ma manarima mās· vinkas· kaki vantil·, pastī, sukhamī, guru dr̥vyak·, kaḍaṅayan·, suji, rambay·, jikən·, lubhī, Apkan· maṇḍaraḥ, gusti Aṅkat·, panulisan· tambi, bhr̥tyaḥ, bharalī, duvəg·, baryyuṁ, tuṅgəṁ, vulakan·, popoṁ, parujar· mañciṁ, tuhălas· varakas·, kaba t·, bahu, khyāti, suraṅgaṇā, te lā, puluḥ, bhujī, saṇḍak·, vakula n· ma ndon·, maṇḍal· lālaṁ, Akajar kumīs·, ḍampal·, kuhal·, capil·, variga kāliḥ bakacak·, busta, saṁlā, tuha vəR̥ḥ dayī, cabil·, nāhan· kvaiḥni kanaṁ rāma manarima mā s·, paknānikanaṁ lmaḥ An· sinīma, śīmā paṅurumbigyana rakryān· kabayān·, parṇnahanya svatantrā, tan· katamāna deniṁ patiḥ vahuta rāma, muAṁ saprakāraniṁ maṅilala dr̥  bya haji riṁ daṅū, miśra parāmiśra vulu-vulu prakāra, paṅu raṁ, kriṁ, paḍam·, manimpiki, paraṇa kan·, limus gal ḥ, paṅaruhan·, taji, vatu tajam· a u , sukun·, halu varak·, ra kadut·, pinilai, kataṅgaran·, tapa haji, Air haji, malandaṁ, L̥ca, L̥b-lab·, kalaṅkaṁ, kutak·, taṅkil· , tr̥pan·, salvīt·, vatu valaṁ, pamaṇikan·, sikpān·, rumbān·, tiṅkə s · ,  viji kavaḥ, vilaṁ vanu A , tuha dagaṁ, juru guśali, tuhān na mbi, tuhān· huñjaman·, juru juḍi, juru jali r·, miśra hino, vli hapū, vli vaduṁ, vli tambaṁ, vli pañjut·, vli haR̥ṁ, pa bisar·, palamak·, pakaluṅkuṁ, Urutan·, dampulan·, tpuṁ kavuṁ, suṁsuṁ paṅu raṁ, pasuk alas·, payuṅan·, pā ṅinn-aṅin· , sipad bilu t·, puluṁ pa ḍi, ska r tahun·, panrāṅa n·, panusuḥ, hopan·, paha liman·, kḍi, valyan·, vidu, sambal·, sumbul·, hulun· haji, pamr̥ṣi, sinaguha, va tak· I jro, Ityevamādi tan· tamā rikanaṁ śĭma pa ṅurumbigyan· lmaḥ varuk· ryy ālasantan·, kevala rakryān· saṁ maśīma A taḥ pramāṇā I sadrabya-hajinya kabaiḥ, samaṅkana Ikanaṁ sukha-duḥkha kady aṅgāniṁ mayaṁ tan·  pa vvaḥ, valū rumambat· riṁ natar·, vipati, vaṅkay· kābunan·, rāḥ kasavur iṁ dalan·, vāk·capala, hastacapala, dūhilatan·, hidu kasirat·, mamijillakan· turaḥniṁ kikir· ma mūk· mamumpaṁ, lūdan·, tūtan·, ḍaṇḍa kuḍaṇḍa , bhaṇḍihālādi, rakryān· saṁ maśīma parānani drabya-hajinya kabaiḥ, kunaṁ Ikanaṁ mañambul·, mañavriṁ, maṁlākha, maṅapu  s· maṅubar·, matarub·, maṅgula, maṁdyūn·, manūla vuṅkuḍu, maṁluruṁ, mapahaṅan·, magavai ruṅki, payuṁ vəlū, mopiḥ, Akajaṁ, Akisī, mamubut·, maṅanam-anam·, manava ṁ ,    2 manahəb· mamisaṇḍuṁ manuk· makala-kalā, rakryān· saṁ maśīma Ataḥ pramāṇā I dr̥bya-hajinya kabaiḥ, samaṅkana Ikanaṁ masambyavahāra hana ṅkāna hinīṅ-hīṅan· kvaihanya Anuṁ  tan· knāna de saṁ ma ṅilala dr̥bya haji, pataṁ tu hān· Iṁ sasambyavahāra Iṁ saśīma, yan· paṅulaṁ kbo 20 kboAnya Iṁ satu hān· sapi 40 Iṁ satuhā n· vḍus· 80 Iṁ satu hān· Aṇḍaḥ satarub· Iṁ satuhān·, maṅaraḥ pataṁ tuhān·, magu luṅan· pata ṁ pasaṁ, paḍahi tluṁ ta ṅkilan·, Uṇḍahagi ruAṁ tuhān·, paṇḍay· mās· ruAṁ guśali, paṇḍay· tamba ga ruAṁ guśali, paṇḍay· vsi ruAṁ guśali, macadar· vvaluṁ pacadaran·, yāpvan· pinikul· dagaṅanya ka dy aṅgā niṁ mabasana, masayaṁ, maṅavari makacapuri maṅuñjal· kapas· vuṅkudu, vsi tambaga kāṅśa timaḥ vuyaḥ paḍat· lṅa bras· gula kusumbha, saprakāra niṁ dval· pinikul·, kalima bantal· pikul·-pikulananya Iṁ satuhān·, Ikanaṁ samaṅka na tan· knāna de saṁ maṅi lala dr̥bya haji, saparānanya sadeśānya, ndān· makmitana ya tuli · maṅke luĪranya, yāpvan· L̥viḥ saṅkā rikanaṁ sapaṁhīṁ Iriya knāna sakaL̥viḥnya de saṁ maṅilala sodhāra haji ta y s nn *a dh ikāna, Irikaṁ kāla maṅaṅsəAkan· rakryān· kabayān· Ibu rakryān· mapatiḥ I halu dyaḥ sahasra pasak-pasak· I śrī mahārāja  su  5 vḍihan· gañjar haji yu  1 I hino su  2  mā  8  vḍihan· jaro haji yu  1 rakryān· mapatiḥ I halu dyaḥ sahasra su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 ra ryān· vka dyaḥ bālīśvara g k su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 rakryān· si rikan· pu balyaṁ su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1  samgat· kanuruhan· pūdā su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 tiruAn· ḍapunta ta ritip· su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 vadihati pu dinakara su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 Akudur· pu tuna ṁ  su  1  mā  4 vḍiha n· yu  1 , ma ṁ huri pu paṇḍamuAn· mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 halaran· pu bhā mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 paku bāṁ saṁ ra limus· mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 vaḍiṅin· pu tīkṣṇa mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 tuhā n i vadihati 2 mira-miraḥ saṁ sudānta, halaran· saṁ lbur poḥ mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, tuhānn i makudur· 2 təpusən·, Ulahan· mā  5 vḍiha n· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, pa ṅuraṁ I vadihati saṁ ra vuṅū, Anuṅgū saṁ deva mā  5 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, paṅuraṁ I makudur· saṁ ra kəvəl·, Anuṅgū saṁ baruṇa mā  5 vḍiha n· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, karamānni ra I vadihati Atuha raray· mā  10 , karamānnira I makudu r· Atuha raray· mā  10 , saṁ hyaṁ kudur· mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 tuhānn iṁ *pakaraṇān· makabehan· juru kanayakān· I mahārāja pu kuṇḍū, juru vadvā rarai pu suriṁ, juru kalula pu tapa, kaṇḍamuhi ḍaṅ ācāryya nārāyaṇa, citralekha saṁ nidhi, paruja r· I halu visāga, ḍapunta basu, I vka viriḍi ḥ,  ḍapunta niścaya, I pa ṅkaja ḍapunta govinda, I kanuruhan· saṁ ra mase, I tiruAn· sumuḍan·, saṁ brahmaśiva, su  1  mā  4 kinabaihannira, citralekha I mahārāja lakṣaṇa , baḍiva, kī rti, mā  4 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ juru kāliḥ vaśaḥ saṁ śabda, kuci saṁ makāra, mā  5 vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, parujarniṁ patiḥ vaśaḥ piṅsor hyaṁ saṁ paku dān· mā  2  ku   2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, parujarniṁ patiḥ kuci paskaran· saṁ caitya mā  2  ku  2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rakryān· bavaṁ mapapan· dyaḥ gula su  2  mā  8 vḍihan· yu  1 , tuhānn i ṁ bavaṁ dyaḥ maluA, Amaṁ rakryān· bavaṁ pu bukəṁ mā  10 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rakryān· vulat patiḥ dyaḥ ḍohol· vinaiḥ vḍihan· jaro haji hlai 1 , samgat· sijana pu pujut· vḍihan·    3 sə:ṁ rāḥ hlai 1 təĀsan· dyaḥ toloboṁ Atəhə r  pat i ḥ ma ṁ harap· babak· I bavaṁ vinaiḥ pasək-pasək· su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 ,  samgat· muṅgaṁ pu maṅubər· vanuA ri muṅgaṁ tuhān i ṁ ka nayakā n· ri halu vḍihan· hlai 1 kakaran· pu munda vḍihan· hlai 1 dyaḥ ghoṣa Amasaṅakan· I rakryān· bavaṁ mapapan· dyaḥ gula vḍihan· hlai 1 dyaḥ pataL̥san· vatak halu vanuA I tumurun· vḍihan· hlai 1 saṁ jula, partaya ri Air banuA vanuA I vi rikan· vḍihan· hlai 1 saṁ praśānta tuhānniṁ kalula I kanuruhan· vanuA I taṅunan· vḍiha n· hlai 1 , patiḥ dyaḥ bajra, dyaḥ kumo 2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ maṁharap· babak· I paḍaṁ I paṅkaja saṁ baruṇa mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 , patiḥ I lmaḥ tulis· saṁ kilipa n· mā  2 vḍi han· yu  1 , tu mpuk· mā  1 vḍihan· hlai 1 dəAn· kāma patiḥ I paḍaṁ mā  2 vḍihan· hlai 1 , rāvaṇa mā  1 vḍihan· hlai 1 , bikər·, hujuṁ, juṁhur·, dəmə, gacəm· ku  2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-so vaṁ, pnik· patiḥ I lmaḥ tulis· maṁharap· babak· vḍihan· hlai 1 , candra, bhanū, bakaṭəl·, ḍaluṁ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ I bavaṁ manujendra vḍihan· hlai 1 Anak·nya ruA vinaiḥ ku  2 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vahuta I mapapan· maṁharap· babak· caitra, Ura k·, Arja, su  1  mā  4 kinabehanya vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vahuta I mapapan· bandhu ramani rakā, buR̥ṁ, kuñjar·, paradhīpa, baliba, śrayisinta, tahimbək·, parujar· jaluk·, sūṅan·, kulumā, baracaḥ, maṁḍampak·, vinkas· surupī, dhara, su  7 kinabaihanya vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ vahuta I pagə ruyuṁ maṁharap· babak· baya d· su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 , vahuta I vsi-vsi maṁharap· babak· baiśākha su  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 , rāma ryy ālasantan· saṁ dr̥vyak·, rambay·, sukhamī, cleṁ, vinaiḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ su  1 kinabehanya, rāma ri lmaḥ tulis· milu, kaki śikha, pahəḥ, dhane ṭi, kuludū, bandī vineḥ vḍihan· hlai m ṣ 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma I skar bila, pəgeṁ, rāma ka bayān· maṅambaḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma I L̥ buḥ runtiṁ, kalaṁ susup· vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma I paḍaṅan· vudyaṁ, tuha kalaṁ karu k · vḍihan· hle 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma I tirim· paṇḍai, tuha kalaṁ manaḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma Iṁ lāpan· rūpa, tuha kalaṁ kūrma vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma I vulu taji kurul· vḍihan· hlai 1 , vi la ryy āla santan· si pilu k· vḍihan· hlai 1 , paṅuraṁ balun· mā  1 , krīṁ landəp· mā  1 , makudur lumakvānusuk· ḍaṇḍə r· mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 sahopakaraṇa saṅkap· riṁ saji, vadihati lumakvānusu k· harava mā  10 vḍihan· yu  1 sahopakaraṇa saṅkap· Iṁ sa ji, I tlasniṁ mavaiḥ pasak-pasak· muAṁ vḍihan· I sira kabaiḥ, pinarṇaḥ Ikaṁ saji I saṁ makudur· I sorniṁ vitāna ma  ṅārgha saṁ pinaka viku sumaṁskāra Ikaṁ təAs· susuk· muAṁ kulumpaṁ, maṁḍiri ta saṁ makudur· maṅañjali I saṁ hyaṁ təAs· maluṅguḥ I sor· niṁ vitāna māndəlan· pāda humaR̥pakan· saṁ hyaṁ təAs· masiṅhal· vḍihan· yu  1 tumūt· saṁ vadihati, lumkas saṁ makudur maṅuyut· manətək· gulūniṁ hayam· linaṇḍəsaka n· Iṁ kulumpaṁ mamantiṅa kan· hantlū Iṁ vatu śĭma, ma maṁmaṁ manapathe saminaṁmaṁnira daṅū I katguhakna saṁ hyaṁ śĭma, Īndaḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ Iṁ śrĭ haricanda  na Agasti mahāR̥ ṣi, pūrba dakṣiṇa paścimottara, maddhya Ū rdhvamadhaḥ ravi śa śi kṣiti jala pavana hutāśana yajamā nākāśa dharma A⌈ horātri sandhyā hr̥daya, yakṣa rākṣasa piśāca pretāsura garuḍa gandharba, catvāri lo kapāla yama baruṇa kuvera vāsava, muAṁ putra devatā pañcakuśika nandīśvara mahākāla a m ṣ dvināyaka nāgarājā du rgādevī, caturaśra Ananta surendra, Anakta hyaṁ kālamr̥tyu gaṇa bhūta, kita pra  4 siddha ma ṁ rakṣa ka ḍatvan· śrī mahārāja I mḍaṁ Iṁ bhūmi matarām· kita Umilu manarīra Umasuk iṁ sarbaśarīra kita sakala sākṣībhūta tumon· madoḥ lavan· mapaR̥̄ Iṁ rahina riṁ vṅi At· ḍəṅəĀkan· ta Ikeṁ sa maya  śa patha su mpa ḥ pamaṁmaṁmami ri kita hiyaṁ kabaiḥ yāvat· Ikaṁṅ vaṁ durācāra tan māgam· tan makmit· Irikeṁ śapatha sinrahakan· saṁ vahuta hyaṁ kudu r· hadyan hulun· matuha raray· laki-laki va dvan· viku gr̥hastha mu Aṁ patiḥ vahuta rāma, Asiṁ Umulah-ulaḥ Ikeṁ lmaḥ varuk· ryy āla santan· śīma paṅurumbigyan· Ina=rpaṇakan· śrī mahārāja I rakryān· kabayān· Ibu rakryān· mapatiḥ ri halu, dyaḥ sahasra Iṁ dlā haniṁ dlāha baba a ta ya ṅuniveḥ yan· davuta saṁ hyaṁ vatu śīma tasmāt· kabvataknanya patyanantā ya kamuṁ hyaṁ deyantāt patī ya tatt anoliha I vuntat· ta t k t tiṁhala I likuR̥n· taruṁ riṅ adəgan· tampyal· I viraṅan· Uvahi I tṅanan· tutuḥ tuṇḍunya blaḥ kapālanya, sbitakan· vtaṅnya rantan· Ususnya vətvakan· ḍalmanya ḍuḍuk hatinya, təhər· pəpəddakan· vkassakan· prāṇāntika, ya n · para riṅ alas· paṅananniṁ moṁ patukanniṁ Ulā, puliraknaniṁ devamanyuḥ yan· para riṁ tgal· Alapanniṁ glap· sampalanniṁ rākṣasa paṅananniṁ vvīl· si pamuṅvan·, tamo laḥ ya ri sthānanya sarbaroga ruma ñca ya, Araḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ kuśika garga metrī kuruṣya pātāñjala suvuk· lo r· suvuk kidul· kulvan· vetan· bvaṅakan· riṅ ākāśa salambitakan· Iṁ hyaṁ kabaiḥ tibākan· Iṁ mahāsamudra klammakan· Iṁ ḍavuha n· A lapan· sa ṁ hyaṁ jalamm er· dudutanniṁ tuviran· saṅhapanniṁ vuhaya, ṅkānan· matya Ikaṁṅ vaṁ Anyāya luməbur· Ikeṁ śīma paṅurumbigyan· ryy ālasantan· Upadravā riṁ devata ka baiḥ bhraṣṭā liputanniṁ phīra muliha Ika naraka, tibākan· riṁ mahārorava klān de saṁ yamabala, palūn de saṁ kiṅkara piṁpitu Ata yan· bimbān· pāpā Ata ya saṁsārā sajīvakāla salvīrniṁ duḥ a paṅgu l kh hanya sarūpaniṁ lara hiḍəpənya sakelikniṁ ma ṁ janma dadyananya Avūka tan· təmuAṁ śama, vkassakan· havu kerir· maṅkanātmahananikaṁṅ vaṁ Anyāya luməbur· Ikaṁ śīma paṅurumbigyan· ryy ālasantan·,  I tlas sa ṁ makudur maṅuyut· masalin· sira kabaiḥ kapva maluṅguḥ Iṁ tkan· pasək· tumut· krama saṁ hana riṁ kon· patiḥ vahuta rāma kabayān· muA ṁ rāma təpi si ri ṁ kulapatī punta matuha rarai, la ki-laki vadvan· kaniṣ ṭh amaddhyamottama tan· hana kāntun· Ilu manaḍaḥ riṁ pkan· ryy ālasantan· kinuran·-kuran· InaṁsəA n· skul· dāndānan· *hinirusan· kla-kla Ambil-ambil· kasyan· lit-lit· tlu sa raṇak· saṅa-saṅān· ha ryyas· rumba-rumbaḥ kuluba n· tetis· tumpuk·-tumpuk· ḍeṁ hañaṁ ḍeṁ hasin· kakap· huraṁ, bija ñjan· kaḍivas· kavan· laya-layar· hala-hala hantlū Ina ri ṁ *suṇḍa Atak· p han· piṇḍa limas· Iṁ saron· saṅa bheda saṅkeṅ ivak·, kvaiḥnikaṁ kbo pinaṅan· i: ə: 3 Ikaṁ saviji praṁ paṁpaṁ pi naṅan· taṇḍa rakryān· muAṁ patiḥ vahuta rāma Ika ṁ  2 pi naṅan· kinabehan· de taṇḍa rakryā n· muAṁ pa tiḥ vahuta rāma, kidaṁ 3   coloṁ celeṁ 1 haṅsa 1 pinaṅa n· kinabehan· Aṅinum· siddhu, tvak· kila ṁ pintlu ⌈ sovaṁ vinuvuhan· tambul· *Inañjapan· kuravu ku ri ma, hasam· dva-dval· madulu r malariḥ Umaṁsə: taṁ jənu skar· Anabəḥ ta saṁ matuvuṁ maṁḍiri rakai vulat patiḥ samgat· sijana saṁ tuhān· I halu patiḥ vahuta rāma, Anambaḥ hu marap· I sārah-araḥ śrī mahārāja, muAṁ rakryān mapatiḥ kamnā sira maṅigla, tuvuṁ bu ṁ kuk· gaṇḍiṁ Iniglakannira, tlasnira maṅigəl· maluṅguḥ sira muvaḥ vinuvuhan· tambul· linarihan· piṇḍuA sovaṁ Uma ṁ sə: ta ṁ baṁlus· lina ri ha n· muvaḥ Atəh i ə r· masavuṅan· manaṅgap· ta pukan· maṅaran· kampallan· vinaiḥ mā  2 mabañol· maṅaran· paṅin-aṅan· vḍihan· hlai 1 si tarata kan· ku  2 vidu maṅaran· vāhu vi nai ḥ mā  2 vḍihan· hlai 1 I tlasniṁ manonto n · men·-men· muliḥ sira kabaiḥ Irikaṁ vṅi manaṅgap· ta rakryān· vayaṁ maṅaran· si kapuluṅan·, vinaiḥ mā  2 vḍihan· hlai 1 nāhan· kramanikaṁ  susukan· śĭma paṅurumbigyan· ryy ālasantan· tkap· rakryān· kabayān· I vruha saṁ sādhujana kabaiḥ I pa gəḥ saṁ hyaṁ śīma likhitapātra saṁ kīrti citralekha I mahārāja  .  .  .  .  . 

--- TRANSLATION ---
  Homage be to the six Vināyakas!  Hail! Elapsed Śaka year 861, month of Bhadrapada, fifth  tithi of the waning fortnight, Vās, Pahiṅ, Friday, lunar mansion Aśvinī, deity Aśvī, conjunction Viṣkambha. That was the time that the decree of the Great King, rakai Halu, dyah Siṇḍok Śrī Īśānavikrama, received by the rakryān minister of Halu, dyah Sahasra, descended to the official of Kanuruhan, pu Udā, instructing with regard to the varuk land The term at Ālasantan, district of Bavaṅ Mapapan, that it be made the freehold of varuk is not well understood. glosses varuk a piece of ground (acquired in a part. way? bought?) , while tentatively suggested: 13 Mungkin kata . lmaḥ waruk menunjuk bagian yang masih hutan belukar or: that it be made into a freehold by the rakryān kabayān , mother of rakryān minister of Halu, dyah Sahasra. Its total: 13 tampah , apart from the housing-premises and orchards, the price for them being 12 kāṭi  of gold . The headmen of Ālasantan together with the inhabitants of the village sold the land. Enumeration of the headmen receiving gold:  The headword of each entry in the list (  vinkas , apkan , gusti , etc.) is directly followed by a name, further names separated by median dots.  Such was the total of the headmen receiving gold. vinəkas the elder Vantil, Pastī, Sukhamī, the teacher Dr̥vyak, Kaḍaṅayan, Suji, Rambay, Jikən, Lubhī  market seller Maṇḍarah  gusti Aṅkat  scribes Tambi, Bhr̥tyah, Bharalī, Duvəg, Baryuṅ, Tuṅgəṅ, Vulakan, Popoṅ  herald Mañciṅ  foresters Varakas, Kabat, Bahu, Khyāti, Suraṅgaṇā, Telā, Puluh, Bhujī, Saṇḍak  vakulan Mandon  maṇḍal Lālaṅ  akajar Kumīs, Ḍampal, Kuhal, Capil  variga Kālih Bakacak, Busta, Saṅlā  tuha vərəh Dayī, Cabil  The purpose of the land being made a freehold was to become a  paṅurumbigyan freehold The compound term of the sīma paṅurumbigyan is reminiscent of the much more common pattern sīma ka-...-an ( sīma kajurugusalyan , sīma kavajvan , sīma kakaṭikan , etc.) seen in numerous Old Javanese inscriptions. But in the present context the word paṅurumbigyan is derived with pa-...-an circumfix, from kurumbigi which seems to be an alternate of kurumbhāgi , a kind of iron tool (knife) ( ). rakryān kabayān . Its status would be independent. It should not be entered as before by the patih s, the vahuta s, the headmen, and all types of collectors of royal revenues: 
	various miśra s, 
	various types of vulu , paṅuraṅ , kriṅ , paḍam , manimpiki , paraṇakan , limus galuh , paṅaruhan , taji , vatu tajam , sukun , halu varak , rakadut , pinilai , kataṅgaran , tapa haji , air haji , malandaṅ , ləca , ləblab , kalaṅkaṅ , kutak , taṅkil , tr̥pan , salvīt , vatu valaṅ , pamaṇikan , sikpān , rumbān , tiṅkəs , viji kavaḥ , vilaṅ vanua , tuha dagaṅ , juru guśali , tuhān nambi , tuhān huñjaman , juru juḍi , juru jalir , miśra hino , vli hapū , vli vaduṅ , vli tambaṅ , vli pañjut , vli harəṅ , pabisar , palamak , pakaluṅkuṅ , urutan , dampulan , tpuṅ kavuṅ , suṅsuṅ paṅuraṅ , 
	forest dwellers ( pasuk alas ), payuṅan , pāṅin-aṅin , sipad bilut , puluṅ paḍi , skar tahun , panrāṅan , panusuh , hopan ,
	mahouts ( pahaliman ), 
	eunuchs ( kḍi ),
	healers ( valyan ), 
	actors ( vidu ), sambal , sumbul , 
	royal servants ( hulun haji ), pamr̥ṣi , sinaguha ,
	the courtiers , etc., shall not enter into the vatak i jro paṅurumbigyan freehold of the varuk land at Ālasantan. Only the rakryān founder of the freehold herself shall have authority over all its royal revenues. Likewise the  payments for  harms and compensations  , such as: sukha-duḥkha I adopt the interpretation of the term  sukha-duḥkha itself, and of the meanings of the items in the following list, from work in progress by Timothy Lubin.  The mayaṅ tan pavvah areca flower that does not bear fruit  valū rumambat riṅ natar gourd that grows along the ground  vipati fatal accident  vaṅkay kābunan bedewed corpse  rāh kasavur iṅ dalan blood scattered on the street  vākcapala verbal assault  hastacapala physical assault  dūhilatan accusing  hidu kasirat spitting  mamijillākan turahniṅ kikir producing the trace of a file  mamūk running amok  mamumpaṅ rape  lūdan ?  tūtan ?  ḍaṇḍa kuḍaṇḍa physical abuse  bhaṇḍihāla ?  etc.  rakryān founder of the freehold shall be the beneficiary of all its royal revenues. As for those who   lOnly the mañambul paint black  mañavriṅ make muslin  maṅlākha dye red  maṅapus twist ropes  maṅubar dye red  matarub make sheds  maṅgula make sugar  maṅdyūn make pots  manūla vuṅkudu stake  mengkudu root maṅluruṅ make castor-oil  mapahaṅan dye with  pahaṅan magavai ruṅki, payuṅ vəlū make baskets, round (?) parasols  mopih work  upih akajaṅ make awnings  akisī make basket works  mamubut produce turnery  maṅanam-anam make plait  manavaṅ catch in nets  manahəb mamisaṇḍuṅ manuk catch or snare birds  makala-kalā ?  rakryān founder of the freehold herself shall have authority over all its royal revenues. Likewise the numbers of those who engage in trade while present there are restricted: those not to be subjected to the collectors of royal revenue are four tradesmen of the same trade per freehold. If they buy buffaloes, the quota of buffaloes is 20 per tradesman; 40 cows per tradesman; 80 sheep per tradesman; one coop of ducks per tradesman; silver-smiths, four masters; wagoners, four yokes; drum  players , three places to perform; carpenters, two tradesman; goldsmiths, two smithies; coppersmiths, two smithies; ironsmiths, two smithies; cadar  cloth makers, eight cadar making places. If their wares are carried by shoulder-pole — such as cloth vendors, tinkers vendors of copper utensils , condiment sellers, kacapuri makers, transporters of cotton, mengkudu , iron, copper, bronze, tin, block salt, sesame, uncooked rice, sugar, safflower seeds? — all types of wares that are carried by shoulder-pole: altogether there may be five shoulder-pole bundles per tradesman. What is up to that limit will not be subjected to the collectors of royal revenue, wherever those traders might go, whatever may be their country of origin . However, they should keep the present document. If their trade is more than the limit imposed on them, they will be subjected to levies by the collectors of all  royal shares proportionally to the excess sa-uddhāra haji but taxation of the excess should not be disproportional . tan adhikāna The form adhikāna is apparently an irrealis passive from * umadhike ‘to exceed’; it seems that Zoetmulder  ( ) has not precisely understood the expression s.vv. adhikāra I.2 and tan adhikara tan adhikāna . At that time the  rakryān kabayān , mother of rakryān minister of Halu, dyah Sahasra, offered gifts:   to the Great King: 5  suvarṇa s, 1 pair of vḍihan gañjar haji  royal reward cloth to the Hino: 2  suvarṇa s, 8 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan jaro haji  to the rakryān minister of Halu, dyah Sahasra: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the  rakryān Vka, dyah Bālīśvara: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the  rakryān Sirikan, pu Balyaṅ: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the official of Kanuruhan,  pu Udā: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Tiruan,  ḍapunta Taritip: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Vadihati,  pu Dinakara: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Akudur,  pu Tunaṅ: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Maṅhuri,  pu Paṇḍamuan: 10 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Halaran,  pu Bhā: 10 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Paku Bāṅ,  ra Limus: 10 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the Vadiṅin,  pu Tīkṣṇa: 10 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the 2 masters of Vadihati,  namely the Mira-Mirah, saṅ Sudānta and the Halaran, saṅ Ləbur Poh: 10 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan , per person the 2 masters of Makudur,  namely Təpusən and Ulahan: 5 māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the Paṅuraṅ of Vadihati,  saṅ ra Vuṅū, watching over saṅ Deva: 5 māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the Paṅuraṅ of Makudur,  saṅ ra Kəvəl, watching over saṅ Baruṇa: 5 māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headmanship of Vadihati, old and young: 10  māṣa s the headmanship of Makudur, old and young: 10  māṣa s the holy Kudur: 10  māṣa s, 1 set of vḍihan all the masters of the Secretariat  : pakaraṇān Regarding the term  pakaraṇān , see our commentary on the Wurudu Kidul inscription.  collectively 1 the supervisor of the  nāyaka -ship of the Great King, pu Kuṇḍū the supervisor of junior troops,  pu Siriṅ the supervisor of servants,  pu Tapa the Kaṇḍamuhi, master Nārāyaṇa  the calligrapher,  saṅ Nidhi; the herald of Halu Visāga,  ḍapunta Basu; of Vka Viridih, ḍapunta Niścaya; of Paṅkaja: ḍapunta Govinda; of Kanuruhan, saṅ ra Mase; of Tiruan Sumuḍan, saṅ Brahmaśiva suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s. calligraphers to the Great King:   4 Lakṣaṇa  Baḍiva  Kīrti māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person both  patih juru s, the vaśah  called  saṅ Śabda, the kuci  called  saṅ Makāra: 5 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan , per person the heralds of the  patih vaśah  and of the piṅsor hyaṅ  called  saṅ Pakudān:  2 māṣa s, 2 kupaṅ s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the heralds of the  patih kuci  and of the pasəkaran called  saṅ Caitya:  2 māṣa s, 2 kupaṅ s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the  rakryān of Bavaṅ Mapapan, dyah Gula: 2 suvarṇa s, 8 māṣa s, 1 set of vḍihan the foreman of Bavaṅ,  dyah Malva and the guardian of the rakryān of Bavaṅ, pu Bukəṅ: 10 māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the  rakryān vulat patih , dyah Ḍohol, was given 1 sheet of vḍihan jaro haji the official of Sijana,  pu Pujut was given 1 sheet of vḍihan sə̄ṅ rāh  Sparkling Blood Cloth the  one of Təasan i.e., Tyasan , dyah Toloboṅ, who was also the atəhər patih ready to carry out the clearing of wood and underbrush at Bavaṅ, was given as gifts: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the official of Muṅgaṅ,  pu Maṅubər, village of Muṅgaṅ, foreman of the group of nāyaka -ship at Halu: 1 sheet of vḍihan the  kakaran , called  pu Munda: 1 sheet of vḍihan  dyah Ghoṣa, teaming up with ? amasaṅakan i The term the amasaṅakan i , apparently not recorded by , is found also in the Palepangan inscription (1v12). rakryān of Bavaṅ Mapapan, dyah Gula: 1 sheet of vḍihan  dyah Pataləsan, district of Halu, village of Tumurun: 1 sheet of vḍihan  saṅ Jula, partaya of Air Banua, village of Virikan: 1 sheet of vḍihan  saṅ Praśānta, foreman of servants at Kanuruhan, village of Taṅunan: 1 sheet of vḍihan the 2  patih s, dyah Bajra and  dyah Kumo:  1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the  patih , ready to carry out the clearing of wood and underbrush at Paḍaṅ and Paṅkaja, called  saṅ Baruṇa: 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the  patih of Ləmah Tulis, called  saṅ Kilipan: 2 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan Tumpuk: 1  māṣa , 1 sheet of vḍihan Dəan  i.e., Dyan Kāma, patih of Paḍaṅ: 2 māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan Rāvaṇa: 1  māṣa , 1 sheet of vḍihan Bikər, Hujuṅ, Juṅhur, Dəmə, Gacəm: 2  kupaṅ s, 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the helper of the  patih of Ləmah Tulis, ready to carry out the clearing of wood and underbrush : 1 sheet of vḍihan Candra, Bhanū, Bakaṭəl, Ḍaluṅ: 1 sheet of  vḍihan , per person the  patih of Bavaṅ called Manujendra: 1 sheet of vḍihan his two children were each given 2  kupaṅ s the  vahuta s of Mapapan, ready to carry out the clearing of wood and underbrush , called Caitra, Urak and Arja: collectively 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s; indvidually, 1 set of vḍihan ; the  vahuta s of Mapapan called Bandhu, father of Rakā, Burəṅ, Kuñjar, Paradhīpa, Baliba, Śrayisinta, Tahimbək; the heralds: Jaluk, Sūṅan, Kulumā, Baracah, Maṅḍampak; the vinəkas es: Surupī, Dhara: collectively 7 suvarṇa s; individually 1 sheet of vḍihan the  vahuta of Pagəruyuṅ, ready to carry out the clearing of wood and underbrush , called Bayad: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan the  vahuta of Vəsi-vəsi, ready to carry out the clearing of wood and underbrush , called Baiśākha: 1 suvarṇa , 4 māṣa s, 1 pair of vḍihan ; the headmen  of Ālasantan rāma namely Dr̥vyak, Rambay, Sukhamī and Cleṅ were given 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person and 1 suvarṇa collectively the headmen of Ləmah Tulis,  namely the venerable Śikha, Pahəh, Dhaneṣṭi, Kuludū and Bandī, were also given 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headman of Səkar Bila  called Pəgeṅ and the headman of Kabayān Maṅambah: 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headman of Ləbuh  called Runtiṅ, the kalaṅ  called Susup: 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headman of Paḍaṅan  called Vudyaṅ and the supervisor of kalaṅ s called Karuk: 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headman of Tirim  called Paṇḍai and the supervisor of kalaṅ s called Manah: 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headman of Lāpan  called Rūpa and the supervisor of kalaṅ s called Kūrma: 1 sheet of vḍihan , per person the headman of Vulu Taji  called Kurul: 1 sheet of vḍihan the Vila at Ālasantan,  called  si Piluk: 1 sheet of vḍihan the Paṅuraṅ  called Balun: 1 māṣa the Kriṅ  called Landəp: 1 māṣa the Makudur who will move forward to demarcate,  called Ḍaṇḍər: 10 māṣa s, 1 set of vḍihan , together with gifts, i.e. equiped with offerings the Vadihati who will move forward to demarcate,  called Harava: 10 māṣa s, 1 set of vḍihan , together with gifts, i.e. equiped with offerings After giving the gifts and the  vḍihan to all of them, the offerings for the Makudur were placed below the canopy. The one serving as mendicant poured water to purify the heart for piercing and the kulumpaṅ stone. The Makudur arose to offer salutation to the holy heart and sat down below the canopy, having his feet as support i.e., he knelt , facing the holy heart , wearing as siṅhəl 1 pair of vḍihan . The Vadihati followed. The Makudur began to uyut  and cleaved the neck of the chicken, using the kulumpaṅ -stone as underlay, and bashed an egg on the sīma stone, pronouncing an admonition and swearing an oath to all those whom they traditionally admonish so that the holy freehold will be respected:  Pay heed you gods at Śrī Haricandana, Great Seer Agasti,  If the bad man does not hold firm, does not keep that oath being submitted by the Vahuta Hyaṅ Kudur, lord and servant, old and young, man and female, mendicant and householder, as well as East, South, West, North, Center, Zenith, Nadir  Sun, Moon, Earth, Water, Wind, Fire, Yajamāna, Ether  Dharma, Day and Night, Twilight, Heart  Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Piśācas, Pretas, Asuras, Garuḍa, Gandharvas  Four Lokapālas: Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, Vāsava  i.e., Indra And sons of the gods: Five Kuśikas, Nandīśvara, Mahākāla, Six Vināyakas, Snake-Kings, goddess Durgā  Quadrangular  Aśvins? , Endless Ananta , Surendra children of the gods Kāla and Mr̥tyu: Gaṇas and Bhūtas  you well-known ones who protect the palace of the Great King at Mḍaṅ in the land of Matarām  you who take part in embodying, entering in all bodies  you all who as witnesses watch far and near, by day and by night, while you listen to the pledge, the sworn oath , the admonition of us to all you gods! śapatha sumpah patih s, vahuta s and headmen — whoever disturbs the varuk land at Ālasantan as a paṅurumbigyan freehold granted by the Great King to the rakryān kabayān , mother of the rakryān Minister of Halu called  dyah Sahasra, up to the future’s future may he split asunder! All the more so if he shall uproot the holy sīma stone. Therefore, even if he must be killed by you, o gods, your approach when you kill him should be without looking back, not looking to the side, clash with the opponent, slap his left side, attack anew his right side, cut down his snout, split his skull, rip open his belly, stretch out his intestines, draw out his entrails, tear out his liver, without delay finish off, bring to an end his life. If he goes to the forest, may he be eaten up by the tiger, bitten by the snake, whirled round and round by divine wrath! If he goes to the field, may he be caught by thunderclap, may his head be torn off by demons, may he be eaten by the Pamuṅvan giants! Unceasingly in his home all diseases torment him! Please you gods Kuśika, Garga, Metrī, Kuruṣya and Pātañjala, guardian of the North, guardian of the South, of the West, of the East, throw him in the air, tear him asunder (?) among all gods, throw him into the great ocean, drown him at the dam! May he be caught by the holy gods in the water! May he be pulled by sea-monsters! May he be snatched by the crocodile! May it be there that he dies, the lawless man who dissolves the paṅurumbigyan freehold at Ālasantan. May he suffer misfortune among all ancestors ! May he go to ruins, may be engulfed in the Phīra! May he reach the hells! May he be dropped in the Great Raurava! May he be cooked by the forces of Yama! May he be hammered no less than seven times by the Kiṅkaras devata servants of Yama ! When he is given shape, it will only be a bad one. He will suffer as long as he lives! May all types of pain be experienced by him! May all sorts of pain be undergone by him! Every detestable thing among born creatures is what he will become! May he rot without finding rest! Leave behind fanned ash! Thus will become the lawless man who dissolves the paṅurumbigyan freehold at Ālasantan! After the Makudur had performed  uyut , they all changed clothes. They all sat in the tkan pasək , following the order of those who are present in the capacity only records pəkan pasək  a square near the palace (where those who offer pasĕk assemble) , but the inscriptions of this period consistently present what seems to be the same term in the form tkan pasək . The expression of saṅ hana riṅ kon might be an equivalent to the expression maṅagam kon commonly used in earlier periods to express a meaning like encumbent, on duty , but I tentatively opt for a word-for-word interpretation to be in the capacity . patih , vahuta , headman of kabayān as well as headman of neighboring villages, temple managers , kulapati punta s, seniors, juniors, men, women, inferior, intermediate and superior. No one was left behind in taking part in feasting on the market place of Ālasantan: manaḍah  The total of containers being regaled,  being offered dressed-up rice  ? , skul dāndānan being ladled  : hinirusan  is in need of correction, as it is based on a single passage from a reissued inscription. An entry needs to be added for the verbal derivation irusan aṅirusi of which hinirusan is the passive form.  cooked foods  , kəla-kəla snacks  , ambil-ambil  kasyan ,  lit-lit ,  tlu saraṇak , is in need of correction, as it is based on only two epigraphic passages that have not been reliably edited. Multiple inscriptions of this period read ranak II tlu saraṇak/saranak . Since the meaning of the second word is not transparent, the meaning of the expression as a whole isn't clear, but it seems to be literally three per . ranak roasted food  , saṅa-saṅān banana core  , haryas  rumba-rumbah ,  kuluban ,  tetis ,  tumpuk-tumpuk , unsalted dried meat  , ḍeṁ hañaṅ salted dried meat  , ḍeṁ hasin cockup  fish , shrimps  , huraṅ  bijañjan  fish , This hapax legomenon could be emended to biluṁluṁ jañjan , but vijañjan may be attested in Bhomāntaka 81.42 (depending on how the words are divided). See . kaḍavi and jañjan  kaḍivas  fish ,  kavan  fish ,  laya-layar ,  hala-hala , eggs  being relaxed with liquor,  The expression  inariṅ suṇḍa has never been understood by previous scholars, and figures in some more or less confusingly misread forms in existing editions (e.g., inarisuṇḍa ). It contains suṇḍa that must be a loanword from Sanskrit śuṇḍā , not recorded in . atak  and milk per limas banana leaf was nine, apart from the fish. The arrangement described here seems reminiscent of the South Indian The number of buffaloes that were eaten is 3. The one was eaten agonistically thali . ? by the praṅ paṅpaṅ taṇḍa rakryān and the patih s, vahuta s and headmen. The 2 were eaten collectively by the taṇḍa rakryān and the patih s, vahuta s and headmen. 3 deer, 1 boar, 1 goose were eaten collectively. They drank sīdhu , tuak , kilaṅ three times each. They were fortified with tambul  refreshments It seems rather clear, from comparison with line 4r17, that and given vinuvuhan must here imply the group of people as subject, and that the gloss to increase, add to in is inadequate. amuvuhi , vinuvuhan , kawuwuhan kuravu , dates, tamarind and  dodol as desert ? . inañjapan The phrase Side by side, they took drinks, inañjapan kuravu kurima asam dvadval occurs in a few contemporary inscriptions (e.g. Linggasuntan b27–28). records only kuravuṅ , but the final nasal is based on only one occurrence, in the Kakavin Rāmāyaṇa , while none of the inscriptions ever shows a clear anusvāra , so I propose to accept kuravu . About this word, Tom Hoogervorst wrote to me (email 29/08/2020): I have wanted to connect Old Javanese Regarding kuravuṅ with modern Javanese krawu and Malay kerabu – a dish consisting of mixed condiments whose precise ingredients differ regionally – in the paper co-authored with Jiří, but decided against it because I couldn’t explain the word-final nasal. Now that it should apparently be kuravu , my theory “works” after all. kurima , from the same email: In Malay, The base kurma has two meanings: 1) a date (the fruit) from Persian ḵẖurmā , and 2) a meat stew from Persian qorma . The second meaning can be excluded in this context, given the pencuci mulut nature of the surrounding words. I’ve only managed to find kurima in the Bausastra: Jarwa Kawi , Padmasusastra, 1903 (https://www.sastra.org/bahasa-dan-budaya/kamus-dan-leksikon/198-bausastra-jarwa-kawi-padmasusastra-1903-11-bagian-1-ha-ka), which lists it as a synonym for ‘mango’. This probably means that the word at one point denoted a specific variety of said fruit. If we assume a Persian etymology, I would have no problems with the time depth, nor with a possible semantic shift to ‘mango’ (cf. mangga apulkat and mangga apel in more recent times). The only thing I couldn’t help you with is the interconsonantal /i/. Javanese has no problem with the segment /rm/, so my best guess would be borrowing through some South Asian vernacular. añjap is not recorded in dictionaries. It seems unikely that while offering unguents malarih here means server , as per  alarih server (of drinks) , and more likely that it means to take drinks (  larih drinks, refreshment ). and flowers ? .  

The jənu səkar tuvuṅ player played. 

The Lord of Vulat Patih, the official of Sijana, the foremen of Halu, the patih s, the vahuta s, the headmen rose to pay homage facing straight in the direction of the Great King and of the rakryān mapatih , prior to dancing. They danced to the crooked tuvuṅ  and to the gaṇḍiṅ . After dancing, they sat down again. They were fortified with tambul and given drinks a second time each. They offered baṅlus  fish while being given drinks again. Then they staged a cock-fight. They hired  After watching the performances, they all went home. At night, the the  tapuk performer called Kampəlan who was given 2 māṣa s the jester called Paṅin-Aṅan  who was given 1 sheet of vḍihan ; and  si Taratakan who was given 2 kupaṅ s the actor called Vāhu who was given 2  māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan rakryān  hired a wayang mapatih  performer called si Kapuluṅan who was given 2 māṣa s, 1 sheet of vḍihan . Such were the proceedings of the demarcation of the  paṅurumbigyan freehold at Ālasantan by the rakryān kabayān . May it be known to all good people that the holy freehold is irrevocable. The plates were engraved by  saṅ Kīrti, calligrapher to the Great King.


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 5: DHARMA_INSIDENKAdanAdan.xml
Title: Adan-Adan (1223 Śaka)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: wuku|nakṣatra|samudra|sapatha|pūjā|sīma|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa|pitr
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
     1 svasti śaka-varṣātīta, 1223 , śrăvaṇa-māsa, tithi pañcadaśī kr̥ṣṇa-pakṣa , ha , U , śa , văra, maḍaṅkuṅan·, grahacāra bāyabyastha, māgha-nakṣatra, pitr̥-deva§ tā, Āgneya-maṇḍala, śiva-yoga, vairāja-muhūrtta, yama-parvveśa, catuspada-kara§ ṇa, siṅha-rāśī, Irika divaśany ājñā śrī mahārāja, narăryya saṅgrāmavijaya,  raṇā§ ,  ṅgātura-para-paraspara-vīroṣadha-mahogravīra sva-hasta-bala-bhīma- , sa masta-vair -va- a i ra-vivarṇna-kampita-kăraṇa saṅhăra-kāla-prajvalitānala-sadr̥śa-śrī-jayakatyə:ṁ-rājāti§- , ripu-vijaya sakala-yava-dvīpa-maṇḍala-samudra-mandārācala-manthāno , pa panna-mahāmr̥ta§- maya gaṅgā-pravāhā-samān , a ā na varata-ratna-vastra-kanakādi-riktha-dāna-śakta vyapagata-gha , śrī kr̥tarājasa jaya  2 na-gagaṇa-tāra-gaṇăkīrṇna-pūrṇna-śa ṅka-ni kā śā r bhinna-samasta-rāja-śaikhara varddhanānantavikramo tuṅgadeva, ṅ t Athavā,  catusprakāra-rājadevy-ānurūpa , sākṣāt ⌈-§- devadevī śrī mahārāja mvaṁ sira rantən hajinira, rājaputrī paramātiśaya catu prakāra, s ṣ ba , sira ta kapāt· kapva suputrī de bhaṭāra śrīkr̥tanagara, li-malayu-madhura-tañjuṅpura-prabhr̥ti, para-dvīpa-rāja-śiro-ghaṭita-caraṇāravinda-śrī-kr̥§ tanagara-mahāprabhu-sad-duhitā sira saṁ lĭna ri śivabuddhālaya, makādi sira saṁ paramasuśīlamahāpatibrata, śrī parameśva rī, dyaḥ devī trībhuvaneśvarī, śrī mahādevī, dyaḥ devī narendraduhitā śrījayendra devī, dyaḥ devī pr jñāpārāmit ā a , mvaṁ sira saṁ paramalalitamahārūpin a ā , Atipriya de § a ī  3 śrī mahārāja, sākṣāt· Arddharājeśvarī, sira mvaṁ saṁ nātha, śrī pāduka rājapatnī, dyaḥ ⌈ devī gāyatrī, Athaca, sat-putra-parigat , Iniriṁ ta śrī mahārāja deni sat-putranira sa ā a ṅke śrī parameśvarī, śrī jayanagara dahapurapratiṣṭitāmitabalavīryyasaṁkĭrṇnasulakṣa ṇataruṇarāja, prabhu taruṇa sulakṣaṇa tan· papramāṇa taṁ balavīryya ri sira, tlas· ta  sira pinratiṣṭa riṁ nagara daha de śrī mahārāja, śrī jayanagaranāmarājābhiṣeka, I§ ka tājñā śrī mahārāja, tinaḍaḥ de rakryan· mahāmantrī katrīṇi, rakryan· mantrī hi⌈ no, rakryan· mantrī sirikan·, rakryan· mantrī halu, Umiṅsor i para taṇḍa rakryan· riṁ pa§ kira-kiran· makabehan· makādi saṁ mantrī mahākuśala, sākṣāt· praṇălāmratisu 4 baddhākən· pagəḥni paṁḍiri śrī mahārāja kāṅkən ĭśvaraprativimba, rakryan apatiḥ, pu vā hana, śīla-guṇācāra-raṅgabalasaṁkīrṇnamaṇḍitamahāmantrīmukhya, rakryan· dmuṁ, pu Elā m·, saṅgrāmāstrahastaripumarddanakaraṇa, rakryan· kanuruhan·, pu ckap·, sakalavairi§ vīratarălaṅghanīya, rakryan· tuməṅguṁ, pu smi, Atĭvamanohararājyābharaṇātmakaśū§ rasiṅharājavatsa, təlas· karuhun· saṁ mantrī vāgmīmaya, mapasaṅgahan· saṁ prāṇarā ja, pu sina, sarvva-nay suśīlendikajña suśīleṅgitajña- nītidakṣa, saṁ rājamantrī, pu baṅo, Aśeṣarā§ ā a jakāryya-p r aramapurass ra, saṁ rājaguṇa, pu kapuk·, jagat·-saṁrakṣaṇa-samasta-nīti ā a vicakṣaṇa, mvaṁ saṅ apañji varṇnajaya, pu kapāt·, samasta-rāja-nandana-kriyă-tatpara, sa 5 ṅ apañji śūrapati, pu siṅhasahəl·, satatarājanirggamānu tasatyapara, ca muvaḥ, ta§ ka kr̥ n· kantun· saṁ mantrī keśadharī, saṅ apañji guṇajaya, ḍaṅ ācāryyāgraja, vāhyāvāhya§ kriyănipuna, saṅ apañji nāgaraka, ḍaṅ ācāryya vīranātha, rājahitakāryyānekasādha navicakṣaṇa, tan· kavun·tat saṁ prāgvivāka nyāyānyāya-vyāvahāra-vicchedaka, saṁ pa mgət i tirvan·, ḍaṅ ācāryya săvitra, nyāya-vyākaraṇa-śāstra-parisamāpta, saṁ pamgət i jamba, ḍaṅ ācāryya rāgavijaya, nyāya-vyākaraṇa-śāstra-parisamāpta, saṁ pamgət i pamvatan·, ḍa ṅ ācāryya smaravijaya, săṁkhyā-prakaraṇa-śāstra-parisamāpta, mvaṁ saṁ pamgət i kaṇḍaṅan rarai, ḍa ṅ ācāryya giṇāntaka, prakaraṇa-śāstra-parisamāpta, makamukhya saṁ dharmmādhikaraṇa, dharmmădhya 6 kṣa riṁ kaśaivan·, saṅ apañji nirasana, ḍaṅ ācāryyāstrarāja, Aneka-prakāra-guṇa-sampa nna-dharmma-parāyana, I piṅsorny ājñā śrī mahārāja, kumonakən irikanaṁ Adan-adan· thāni va tək· luraḥ siṅgahan·, padaməlakna saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji praśāsti tinaṇḍa kr̥tarājasa-jayavarddhanalā ñchana, sambandha, gati śrī pāduka rājarṣī, valkaladharī suśīlaśuddhācāra satatadharmmacintana  , sthiratara ta sira gum ə gvani kasatyan· patibratăbrata, mvaṁ tan alupe kăbhyāsaniṁ sarvva⌈ devārccana, makataṅgvan sadānusmr̥tinire saṁ hyaṁ parameṣṭadevatā, mătāmahī ta sira ⌈ de śrī mahārāja, sira tāminta ri śrī mahārāja ri knohanikaṁ vānva riṅ adanadan·, An susu§ kən· sīma de śrī pāduka rājarṣī, makadon· paṁlālananna na Uṅgvana śrī pāduka rājarṣī  7 vyavaś yāṁlampahakən· devārccanāmrārthanakna pagəhani paṁḍiri śrī mahārāja riṁ ratna a ā kanakasiṅhāsana, maṅkana Iṣṭaprayojana śrī pāduka rājarṣī, śrī mahārāja pva sira pra bhu dev ṅśa svarggāvatīrṇnaviṣṇvavatāra, sākṣāt· bhaṭāra janărddhanāmarālayāvatīrṇne§ a ā nāṅkan akən· rumakṣaṁ sarvvadharmma, munarjīvaknaṁ jagaddhita, mataṅyan· tan· tinəṅət ikaṁ sa§ kinahyunakən śrī pāduka rājarṣī de śrī mahārāja, Āpan· paramārthadharmmakāryya d onya, yadyan tāsiṁ dharmmakāryya salviranya, tan dadi śrī mahārāja sira tan· mukyadharmmaka rttā, kimuta sira yan· dharmmakāryyaniṁ tuhatuha, nimittanyan kinonakən ikaṁ vānva riṅ a danadan·, padaməlakna saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji praśāsti tinaṇḍa kr̥tarājasa-jayavarddhana-lāñcha 8 na, Umuṅgva ri salaḥ sikiniṅ upālatāmraripta, makarasa ri vnaṅanikanaṁ vānva riṅ adanadan su sukən· sīma de śrī pāduka rājarṣī, saha saṅkeṁ sāmyātagan· vatək· luraḥ siṅgahan·, makadon sīma śrī pāduka rājarṣī, tumusa tke santāna pratisantāna śrī pāduka rāja§ rṣī, yadyan· məne hləm· katka dlāhaniṁ dlāha, kunəṁ parṇnaḥnyan· sīma de śrī pāduka rā§ jarṣī, kevalādəg· riṅgit·, svatantrā tan· katamana deniṁ vinava saṁ mănāk k atrīṇi, pa ṅkur·, tavan·, tirip·, mvaṁ piṅhai vahuta, saprakāraniṁ maṅilala dr̥vya haji riṁ daṅū, miśra paramiśra, vulu-vulu prakāra, paṅuraṁ, kriṁ, paḍəm·, manimpiki, paranakan·, limus· ga§ luḥ, maṁriñci, maṁhuryyālāla, paraṁ, suṅka, dūra, paṅaruhan·, taji, vatu tajəm·, sukun·,  9 halu varak·, rakasaṁ, ramanaṁ, piniṅlai, kataṅgaran·, tapa haji, Air haji, malaṇḍaṁ, lca, lə bləb·, pakalaṁkaṁ, pakaliṁkiṁ, kutak·, taṅkil·, tr̥pan·, salyut·, vatu valaṁ, pamaṇi§ kan·, paṇiga, sikpan·, rumban·, vilaṁ thāni, viji kavaḥ, tiṅkəs·, Avi, tuha dagaṁ, tu§ ha nambi, tuha juḍi, tuhan uñjəman·, juru gosali, juru jalir·, maṁrumbai, maṁguñjai, pabi sar·, paguluṁ, pavuṁkunuṁ, puluṁ paḍi, miśra hino, miśrāṅinaṅin·, vli hapū, vli vaduṁ vli tāmbaṁ, vli pañjut·, vli haR̥ṁ, palamāk·, pakaluṁkuṁ, Urutan·, ḍampulan·, tpuṁ ka vuṁ, suṁsuṁ paṅuraṁ, pasuk alas·, patikəl aṅgas·, payuṅan·, sipat· vilut·, jukuṁ, pā ṅinaṅin·, pamavasya, hopan·, panraṅan·, səkar tahun·, pahaliman·, kḍi, valya 10 n·, vidu maṅiduṁ, sumbal·, sumbul·, hulun· haji, siṅgaḥ, pabr̥si, vatək iṁ jro, Ityai§ vamādi kabeḥ, tan· tam ya Irikaṁ sīma śrī pāduka rājarṣī Iṅ adanadan·, samaṅka§ a ā na tekanaṁ sukhaduḥkha magə:ṅ aḍmit·, kadyaṅganiṁ mayaṁ tan· pavvaḥ, valūḥ rumāmbat iṁ nata r·, vipati , vaṅkai kabunan·, rāḥ kasamburat iṁ natar·, vākcapāla, hastacapāla, duhi§ latən·, hidu kasirat·, Amijilakən· vuryyaniṁ kikir·, mamuk·, mamuṅpaṁ, ludan· , tūtan, Aṅśa pratyaṅśa, ḍaṇḍa kuḍaṇḍa, maṇḍihalādi, kevala saṁ masīma riṅ adanada n· , Ataḥ pramāṇa ri sasukhaduḥkhanya kabeḥ, kunəṁ Ikanaṁ miśra mañəmbul·, Añaṁvriṁ§ malaka, mamahaṁ, maṅapus·, maṅapū, maṅubar·, matarub·, maṁgula, maṁdyun·, manula,  11 vuṁkuḍu, magavai ruṁgi, payuṁ vəlū, mopiḥ, makajaṁ, magavai kisi, mamubut·, maṅanām-a§ nām·, manavaṁ, manaṅkəb·, Añjariṁ, mamisaṇḍuṁ manuk·, makala-kalā, sama sānak· ri§ ṅ adanadan· Ataḥ pramāṇeriya kabeḥ, kunəṁ parimāṇanika ṁ lmaḥ riṅ adanadan·, ri§ pūrvva satapəl· vatəs· lāvan i vaḍuṁ, maṅidul dudug· riṅ āgneya, satapəl· va təs· lāvan· tinavun·, maṅulon· tka riṁ dakṣiṇa, satapəl· vatəs· lāvan· pa§ tambaṅan·, maṅulon· dudug· riṁ nairiti, satapəl· vatəs· lāvan· kaveṅan·, maṅalor· tka riṁ paścima, satapəl· vatəs· lāvan· Iṁ jajar·, maṅalor· dudug· riṁ bā yabya, satapəl· vatəs· lāvan iṁ tāmbar·, maṅetan· tka riṅ uttara, satapəl· vatə 12 s·, lāvan· I paḍasan·, maṅetan· dudug· riṅ aiśānya, satapəl· vatəs· lāva§ n· I pun·ten·, maṅidul· tka riṁ pūrvva muvaḥ, samaṅkana parimāṇanikaṁ lmaḥ riṅ ada nadan· sīma śrī pāduka rājarṣī, kunəṁ tiṁkaḥnikaṁ lmaḥ riṁṅ adanadan· de śrī pāduka rājarṣī, maṅalap ta sira lmaḥ yathāśakti lam u n· hana cihnanirān· panusuk irikaṁ vā§ nva riṅ adanadan·, Ikaṁ savaḥ, ri kəməṁ, pañjər·, 7 , I L̥bak·, pañjər·, 4 , I § saṇḍa, pañjər·, 1 , I tāmbak·, pañjər·, 4 , I barat·, pañjər·, 4 , piṇḍa sa§ vaḥ śrī pāduka rājarṣī, pañjər·, 20 , mvaṁ kubvan·, Iṁ kubvan agəḍe, paran·, 1 , lāvan· pomahan· sapomahan·, samaṅkana lmah inalap· kaputrāṅśana d§ 13 e śrī pāduka rājarṣī, kunəṅ ikaṁ lmaḥ śeṣa, yatikā kaputrāṅśana ri sama sāna k· mvaṁ pakna devapūjā, kunəṁ lvirniṁ sama sānak· sākṣāt t umarima saṁ hyaṁ rājapra śāsti, rakryan apatiḥ riṁ mahībit·, pu Ajaran·, mūladharmma, nāma potra, ki § hadyan avasana, makasikasir·, raṅga lintaṁ samaṁkana pratyekaniṁ sama sānak·  riṅ adanadan· de śrī pāduka rājarṣī, kunəṁ kinavənaṅakən· sama sānak· de śrī mahārāja, riṁ kevvaniṁ rarai sutakādi, Amaguta pajəṁ pañcavarṇna pinagut· Acuriṅălaryya-laryyan tan· paṁkaṅṡya, Agilaṁ-gilaṅa hampyal· gaḍiṁ, prās· vataṁ, prās aṅgī, prās· buntər·, prās siddhayuga, vr̥ttivalī, santi, pahavvan·§  14 havvan·, pasiliḥ galuḥ, tuvuḥ-tuvuhan·, ci pātra, Aṅaṅgva salvirniṁ vali, § tra va makādi, nāgapuṣpa, navagraha, Ajənva kanaka, Asəkara bvat· hino, maṁkana kinavnaṅakən i sama sānak iṅ adan-adan· de śrī mahārāja, tlas labdhāpagəḥ § tan· hananiṁ vanya muṁkimuṅkila məne hləm·, yadyapin· katka ri dlāhaniṁ dlāha, d e saṁ prabhumantryanāgata, ṅuniveḥ yan· grāma sāmānya, mvaṁ piṅhe vāhuta § rāma, kunəṁ ri səḍəṅanyan· hana vanyāṁruddha ri rasa saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji praśāsti riṅ ada nadan·, salvirniṁ pañcamahāpātaka bhuktinya riṅ ihatra paratra, In aḥ ta kita kamu § ḍ d hyaṁ haricandana, Agasti mahārṣi, pūrvvadakṣiṇapaścimottaramaddhyorddhādhaḥ, ra 15 v śa a i i kṣiti jala pavana hutasāna, yajamănākāśa dharmmāhoratri sandhya s ś dvaya, yakṣa răkṣasa piśāca pretăsura garuḍa gandharvva, graha kinnāra mahorāga caturi lokapāla, yama baruṇa kuvaira bāsava, mvaṁ putra devatā pañcaku§ śīkā, nandīśvara mahākāla, ṣadvināya ka dūrggadevī caturāśra, surendra, A Anta Ananta na ta hyaṁ kālamr̥tyu bhūta gaṇa, sahananta rumakṣaṁ sakalabhūmimaṇḍala, kita § k n Umilu manarīra riṁ sarvvabhūta, kita sakalasākṣībhūta tumonaṅ adoh apaR̥ riṁ § rahineṁ kuL̥m·, At· R̥ṅə: Ikeṁ samaya sapatha sumpaḥ pamaṁmaṁmamīri kita ka mu hyaṁ kabeḥ, yāvat ikaṁ vvaṁ dūrācārāṅulahulaha Ikeṁ sīma riṅ adanadan·,  16 yadyan· brāhmaṇa kṣatriya vaiśya śūdra, viku, brāhmacāri gr̥hasta vanaprastha bhi§ kṣuka, mvaṁ piṅhai v huta rāma, nāyaka parttaya, hatu tali ser·, Asiṅ avakanya ā a , tasmāt· kabvat·karmmaknanya, patyanan ta ya denta kamu hyaṁ kabeḥ, deya n tat patī§ ya, yan aparanparan, humalintaṁ riṁ tgal·, sahutən deniṅ ulā mandi, yan· pareṅ alas·  dəmakən iṁ moṁ, maṁlaṁkahana mi ṁ maṁ, yan· halivat· riṁ vvaiy agə:ṁ, saṅhapən de§ niṁ vuhaya, mumul·, tuviran·, yan· halivat· riṁ havan· gə:ṁ, kasopa vula§ ṅun· haliliṅəṅə:na, yan· hudan· sambəR̥n deniṁ glap·, yan· hana riṅ umaḥnya ka§ tibāna bajrāgni tan· pavarṣa, liputən· gsəṅana de saṁ hyaṅ āgni vehən· bhaṣmi§ 17 bhūta saha dr̥v y anya, tan· panoliha riṁ vuntat·, taruṁ riṅ adgan·, tāmpyal· riṁ kiva n·, Uvahi ri tṅənan·, tutuḥ , bəlaḥ kapălanya, səbit· vtəṁnya, tatas ḍaḍa§ tuṇḍanya uṇḍuhuṇḍutanya nya, vtvakən· ḍaL̥manya, paṅan· dagiṁnya, Inum· rāḥnya, Atəhər· pəpədakən· prāṇantika, byə:ṅakən riṅ ăkāśa, tibākən riṁ mahārorava, Astu, Astu, Astu, // va§ hi vkas i

--- TRANSLATION ---
  Hail! Elapsed Śaka year 1223, month of Śrāvaṇa, fifteenth  tithi of the waning fortnight, Haryang, Umanis, Saturday, ( wuku ) Maḍaṅkuṅan, the grahacāra in the north-west, lunar mansion Māgha, deity Pitr̥s, the maṇḍala is south-east, the Śiva, muhūrta Vairāja, the regent of the astronomical node Yama, the karaṇa Catuspada, the zodiac sign Leo. That was the time of the order of the Great King, Narārya Saṅgrāmavijaya,  great and fierce hero who is the medicine for mutually inimical heroes wounded on the battle-field , cause with his own hands of the pallor and the trepidation of the best of fierce-headed enemies , victorious over the extreme enemy Śrī Jayakatyə̄ṅ who is like the fire ignited at the time of destruction , full of the great ambrosia obtained by the churning through Mount Mandara of the ocean which was the entire territory of the island of Java , capable of unending gifts of wealth such as jewels, gold, etc., like the stream of the Ganges , crown of all kings not different from the full moon sprinkled with clusters of stars in the cloudless sky , Śrī Kr̥tarājasa Jayavardhana Anantavikramottuṅgadeva. Moreover,  the four different queens were like him , like god and goddess were the Great King and his royal sisters, fourfold princesses of great excellence, daughters of the Great King Śrī Kr̥tanagara whose lotus feet were striven after by the heads of kings of the other islands such as Bali, Malayu, Madhura, Tañjuṅpura — all the four of them were the fine daughters of Lord Śrī Kr̥tanagara who is dissolved at Śivabuddhālaya, beginning with the chief queen, of highest propriety and greatly devoted to her husband, Her Royal Highness HRH, Tribhuvaneśvarī; dyaḥ devī after whom followed Śrī Mahādevī, HRH Narendraduhitā; Śrī Jayendradevī, HRH Prajñāpāramitā; and she who is exceedingly voluptuous and of great beauty, utterly beloved of the Great King, like an Ardharājeśvarī, she with her husband, her Majesty the Royal Consort, HRH Gāyatrī. Moreover, surrounded by a good son, the Great King was accompanied by his good son by the Chief Queen,  a young king established at the victorious city of Dahapura  or: Śrī Jayanagara, , of  the limitless force and heroism, covered with auspicious marks, a young king of fine qualities, the force and  heroism in him having no limits; he has been established by the Great King in the country of Daha, Śrījayanagara by his consecration name. young king established at Dahapura That was the order of the Great King, received by the Three Lords Great Ministers: the great minister of Hino; the great minister of Sirikan; the great minister of Halu. It came down to all the ranking lords  in the council, beginning with: taṇḍa rakryān  And first of all: the greatly skilled minister,  pedestal in bodily form for stabilizing the position of the Great King as an image of Īśvara , the lord Patih named Pu Vāhana, the foremost of great ministers adorned with the colors of integrity, virtue, conduct mixed with force ; the lord of  Dmuṅ  named Pu Elām, who caused the ruin of his enemies with the battle weapons that were his arms ; the lord of  Kanuruhan  named Pu Ckap, unsurpassable by the most heroic of all his enemies; the lord of  Tuməṅguṅ  named Pu Smi, child of the heroic lion king characterized by the exceedingly beautiful royal decorations .  and: the eloquent minister with the title  Prāṇarāja  named Pu Sina, knower of signs of high integrity, skilled in all political conduct ; the royal minister  named Pu Baṅo, who was the superior forerunner in every royal undertaking ; the  Rājaguṇa  named Pu Kapuk, wise in all policies for protecting the world ;  And also, not left behind were: the one with the byname  Varṇajaya , named Pu Kapāt, who excelled in all acts pleasing to the king ; the one with the byname  Śūrapati , named Pu Siṅhasahəl, focused on loyalty, participating in every royal undertaking .  Not left behind were: the minister  Keśadharī , with the byname Guṇajaya , Master Agraja, adept in the external and internal rituals ; the one with the byname  Nāgaraka , Master Vīranātha, clever in the realization of numerous good works for the king .  at the descent of the command of His Majesty, ordering with regard to Adan-Adan, village of the district of Lurah Siṅgahan, that a holy royal edict should be made, sealed with the emblem of Kr̥tarājasajayavardhana. the judge,  who distinguishes between what is right and wrong in disputes , the official of Tirvan, master Savitra, fully accomplished in treatises of Nyāya and grammar ; the official at Jamba, master Rāgavijaya,  fully accomplished in the treatises of Nyāya and grammar ; the official at Pamvatan, master Smaravijaya,  fully accomplished in treatises of Sāṁkhya and Prakaraṇa ; and the official at Kaṇḍaṅan Rare, master Giṇāntaka,  fully accomplished in Prakaraṇa treatises ; having as head the surveyor  or: authority of Dharma , the inspector of religious foundations in Śaiva matters, the one with the byname Nirasana , master Astrarāja, fully intent on Dharma endowed as he was by numerous types of virtues , The occasion was the manner in which her Majesty the Royal Recluse wore bark-cloth, maintained integrity and pure conduct, always mindful of Dharma. She very steadfastly maintained fidelity to her vow of being a faithful wife. And she did not forget the practice of worshiping the gods, having as base the continuous calling to mind of her highest chosen deity. She was the maternal grandmother of the Great King. She made a request to the Great King whether it would be suitable for the village Adan-Adan that a  sīma be demarcated by her Majesty the Royal Recluse, with the aim that it be a pleasure grove to be occupied by her Majesty the Royal Recluse, as she makes strenuous efforts to carry out the worship of the gods, in order to pray for the steadfastness of the reign of the Great King on the Bejeweled-Golden Lion Throne. Such was the desire of her Majesty the Royal Recluse. In as much as the Great King was  an incarnation of Viṣṇu, descended from heaven as a portion of the lord-god , the Lord Janārdana in bodily form, descended from the abode of the immortals, regarded as protecting all foundations, for the purpose of reviving the good in the world — that is why none of the desires of  her Majesty the Royal Recluse were refused by the Great King. Because the purpose of this was to a work of ultimate Dharma. Even if we regard all kinds of Dharma work, it does not happen that the Great King is not the foremost Dharma worker. All the more so if it is a Dharma-work of an elder. This was the occasion on which it was ordered with regard to the village of Adan-Adan that a holy royal order  in the form of an edict should be made, sealed with the emblem of Kr̥tarājasajayavardhana, to remain on one or the other of the saṁ hyaṅ ājñā haji praśāsti possible materials, that is stone, copper or palm leaf. Its substance concerned the fact that the village of Adan-Adan was allowed to be demarcated as sīma by her Majesty the Royal Recluse along with  the commoners to be conscripted from the district of Lurah Siṅgahan. Its aim was that the saha saṅkeṅ sīma of her Majesty the Royal Recluse would pass down to the descendants and remote descendants of her Majesty the Royal Recluse, now, hereafter down to the future's future. As for its status, it is that of  sīma of her Majesty the Royal Recluse was exclusively autonomous : it would be independent adəg riṅgit , not to be entered by the servants of the three dignitaries svatrantra Paṅkur , Tawan , Tirip the Piṅhai , the Vahuta ; all those who previously enjoyed the usufruct of the royal property: Miśras and minor Miśras ; various Vulu s; the Paṅuraṅ , the Kriṅ , the Paḍəm , the Manimpiki , the Paranakan , the Limus Galuh , the Maṅriñci , the Maṅhuryālāla , the Paraṅ , the Suṅka , the Dūra , the Paṅaruhan , the Taji , the Vatu Tajəm , the Sukun , the Halu Varak  Rhinoceros Club , the Rakasaṅ , the Ramanaṅ , the Piniṅlai , the Kataṅgaran , the Tapahaji , the Airhaji , the Malaṇḍaṅ , the Ləca , the Ləbləb , the Pakalaṅkaṅ , the Pakaliṅkiṅ , the Kutak , the Taṅkil , the Tr̥pan , the Salyut , the Vatu Valaṅ , the Pamaṇikan , the Paṇiga , the Sikpan , the Rumban , the Vilaṅ Thāni , the Viji Kavah , the Tiṅkəs , the Avi , the Tuha Dagaṁ , the Tuha Nambi , the Tuha Juḍi , the Tuhan Uñjəman , the Juru Gosali , the Juru Jalir , the Maṅrumbai , the Maṅguñjai , the Pabisar , the Paguluṅ , the Pavuṅkunuṅ , the Puluṅ Paḍi , the Miśra Hino , the Miśra Aṅinaṅin , the Vli Hapū , the Vli Vaduṅ , the Vli Tāmbaṅ , the Vli Pañjut , the Vli Harəṅ , the Palamak , the Pakaluṅkuṅ , the Urutan , the Ḍampulan , the Tpuṅ Kavuṅ , the Suṅsuṅ Paṅuraṅ , the Pasuk Alas , the Patikəl Aṅgas , the Payuṅan , the Sipat Vilut , the Jukuṅ , the Pāṅinaṅin , the Pamavasya , the Hopan , the Panraṅan , the Səkar Tahun , the Pahaliman , the Kḍi , the Valyan , the Vidu Maṅiduṅ , the Sumbal , the Sumbul , the Hulun Haji , the Siṅgah , the Pabr̥si , the group inside, and so forth all of them. They shall not enter the sīma of her Majesty the Royal Recluse at Adan-Adan. In the same way the  fines to be imposed for offenses, great or small: areca-blossom that doesn't produce a nut , gourd-vine creeping in the yard mayaṅ tan pavvaḥ , disaster of a corpse exposed to dew valū rumambat iṅ natar , blood spattered in the yard vipati vaṅke kabunan , abuse rāh kasamburat iṅ natar , slapping vākcapala , slander hastacapala , saliva sprinkled duhilatən , producing the trace of a file hidū kasirat , running amok mamijilakən vuryyaniṅ kikir , raping a woman mamuk , mamuṅpaṅ  , ludan  , tūtan  , battery haṅśa pratyaṅśa , ḍəṇḍa kuḍəṇḍa  , etc., all kinds of them. Only the maṇḍihalādi sīma owners at Adan-Adan are the authority over all of its fines to be imposed for offenses. As for the  Miśra Mañəmbul , the Añaṅvriṅ , the Malaka , the Mamahaṅ , the Maṅapus , the Maṅapū , the Maṅubar , the Matarub , the Maṅgula , the Maṅdyun , the Manula , the Vuṅkuḍu , the Magavai Ruṅgi , the Payuṅ Vəlū , the Mopih , the Makajaṅ , the Magavai Kisi , the Mamubut , the Maṅanāmanām , the Manavaṅ , the Manaṅkəb , the Añjariṅ , the Mamisaṇḍuṅ Manuk , the Makalakalā : only all of the relatives of her Majesty the Royal Recluse at Adan-Adan have authority over them. As for the perimeter of the lands at Adan-Adan: at the mark East, it shares a border with Vaḍuṅ; moves south up to  the mark Southeast, sharing a border with Tinavun; moves south to dudug ri the mark South, sharing a border with Patambaṅan; moves west up to the mark Southwest, sharing a border with Kaveṅan; moves north to the mark West, sharing a border with Jajar; moves north as far as the mark Northwest, sharing a border with Tāmbar; goes east up to the mark North, sharing a border with Paḍasan; goes east as far as the mark Northeast, sharing a border with Punten; goes south back to the mark East. Such is the perimeter of the lands at Adan-Adan which are a tka ri sīma of her Majesty the Royal Recluse. As for the arrangement  or: condition of the lands at Adan-Adan by her Majesty the Royal Recluse, they the relative take as much land as they can, provided that there is a sign that she has demarcated the village Adan-Adan: 7 rods of wet-rice fields in Kəməṅ; 4 rods in Ləbak; 1 stake in Saṇḍa; 3 rods in Tāmbak; 4 rods in Barat. The total of wet-rice fields of her Majesty the Royal Recluse: 20 rods . With a garden at Kubvan Agəḍe, 1 share. With habitation land: one habitation land. That much land was taken by her Majesty the Royal Recluse to become an inheritance for her offspring . And the remaining land was for all the relatives , to become an inheritance for their offspring , and to serve for worship of the gods. As for the identify  of the relatives who personally received the holy royal edict: lvir  Thus the specification of the relatives at Adan-Adan of her Majesty the Royal Recluse. And all the relatives were given entitlement by the Great King: the lord minister of Mahibit  called Pu Ajaran the  Mūladharma , whose childhood name was Ki Hadyan Avasana, now having the name Raṅga Lintaṅ.  In this way the relatives at Adan-Adan were given entitlements by the Great King. They were irrevocable. to nurture children beginning at birth, etc.;  brandish a five-colored  pinagut parasol; play the  curiṅ ; stay in a pavilion without playing the  kaṅsi ; to have ivory bamboo as bench;  make offerings of  the type  vataṅ , make offerings of the type  aṅgī , make offerings of the type  buntər , make offerings of the type  siddhayuga ;   , vṛtttivali  , a powder box, śānti  , pasilih galuh  , tuvuhtuvuhan  ; citrapattra to wear any kind of cloth, such as:  nāgapuṣpa and navagraha ; to use gold  boreh ; to wear flowers in the  hino- fashion. Let there be no one who dares to nullify it now and in the future, even down into the future's future, at the hands of future kings and ministers, all the more to common villagers, and the  Piṅhes , Vahutas , and Elders. And whenever there is one who dares to obstruct the substance of the holy royal order  in the form of an edict on behalf of Adan-Adan, their lot will be the consequences of the Five Majors Sins, in this world and the next. Pay heed you gods Haricandana, Agastya Maharṣi,   East, South, West, North, Center, Zenith, Nadir;  Sun, Moon, Earth, Water, Wind, Fire, Yajamāna, Ether;  Dharma, Day and Night, Two Junctures;  Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Piśācas, Pretas, Asuras, Garuḍa, Gandharvas, Grahas, Kinnaras and Great Snakes;  the four World Guardians: Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, Vāsava  Indra ; and the Sons of the gods: the Five Kuśikas;  Nandīśvara, Mahākāla, Six Vināyakas, goddess Durgā, Caturaśra;   the Square one, Ananta Surendra, Ananta the god , Kāla and Mṛtyu, Bhūtas and Gaṇas. All those of you who are present protecting the whole orb of the world, you who join in taking bodily shape in all creatures, you who are all witnesses who will see what is near and far, by day and by night, as you listen to this pledge, the curse, the oath, the imprecation of us to all you gods.  As many as are the ill-behaved people who will disturb this  sīma of Adan-Adan, whether they be Brahmin, Kṣatriya , Vaiśya , Śūdra , hermit, students, householder, forest-dweller, mendicant, including the Piṅhais , the Vahuta s, the elders, dependents of chiefs, the hatutaliser , whatever be their nature. Therefore they will undergo the consequences of their action. Let them be slain by all you gods. In killing, your approach shall be as follows . If while traveling he passes by a dry field, may he be bitten by a poisonous snake. Going into the forest may he be pounced upon by a tiger. May he step over a  Waringin root. When he passes by a large body of water, may he be caught by a crocodile, a shark , a sea monster mumul . If he is going on a high way, may he be scared stiff, dazed, stunned, drowsy. If it rains, may he be struck by thunderclap. When he is home, may he be struck by lightning without rain. May he be engulfed and burned by God Agni. May he be caused to turn to ash, with his possessions. May he leave without looking back, clashing with the opponent. Slaps his left side, attack anew his right side, cut his snout, split his skull, rip open his belly, draw out his entrails, break open his chest, eat his flesh, drink his blood, without delay finish off what remains of the dead one, throw it into space, cast him into the tuviran Mahāraurava . So be it! So be it! So be it!


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 6: DHARMA_INSIDENKLinggasuntan.xml
Title: Linggasuntan (851 Śaka)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: nakṣatra|vāra|sapatha|pūjā|samgat|sīma|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
   Front  //Oṃ Avighnam astu// svasti śakavarṣātīta 851 bhadravāda-māsa, tithi dvādaśi kr̥ṣṇa-pakṣa pa, pa, vr̥, vāra, māgha-nakṣatra, pitara-devatā, parigha-yoga, Irikā divaśani Ājña śrī ma hārāja rake hino pu siṇḍok· śrī Īśānavikrama dharmmotuṅgadeva, Umiṁsor· I samgat· mo maḥh-umaḥ kāliḥ maḍaṇḍər· pu padma, Aṅgəhān· pu kuṇḍala, kumonakan· Ikaṁ vanuA I liṅgasuntan·, va tak· hujuṁ gavay· mā 2 kaṭik·  2 paṅguhan tapak· mas· su 3 Iṁ satahun·-satahun· sīmān· susukan· I Arpanākna Arpaṇākna bhaṭara I valaṇḍit· paknānya sīma punpunana bhaṭāra Umyāpāra Asiṁ samananā I saṁ hyaṁ dharmma muAṁ paṅimbuha ri kapūjān· bha ṭāra Aṅkan· prativarṣa, maṅkana Iṣṭaprayojana śrī mahārāja Irikaṁ vanuA I liṅgasu ntan· Inārpanā kan· I bhaṭāra I valaṇḍit· māri vatak· hujuṁ, parṇnahanya svatantrā tan· katamāna deniṁ patiḥ vahuta muAṁ saprakāraniṁ maṅilala drabya ha ji riṁ daṅū miśra parāmiśra vulu-vulu prakāra paṅuraṁ, kriṁ, paḍam manimpiki, paranakan·, limus galuḥ paṅaruhan·, tiṅkəs, viji kavaḥ, taji, vatu tajam·, sukun·, halu varak·, rakadut·, pinilay·, kataṅgaran·, tapa haji, Air haji, malandaṁ lva, L̥b·blab·, kalaṁ kaṁ, kutak·, taṁkil·, tr̥pan·, salvit·, vatu valaṁ, pamaṇikan·, maṇiga, sikpan·, rumbān·, vilaṁ vanuA, tuhān dagaṁ, juru gusali, maṁrumbai, maṁguñjai, tuhān· nambi, tuhān huñjamman·, tuhān· juḍi, juru jalir, puluṁ paḍi, miśra hino, vli hapu, vli vaduṁ, vli tambaṁ, vli ha R̥ṁ, vli pañjut·, palamak·, pakaluṁkuṁ, Urutan·, dampulan·, tpuṁ kavuṁ, suṁsuṁ paṅuraṁ, pasuk alas·, mapayuṅan·, sipat vilut·, pā ṅin-aṅin·, pamāvaśya, toḥ karuṁ, hopan·, skar tahun·, panrāṅan·, panusuḥ, kḍi, valyan·, mahaliman·, vidu, sambal· , sumbul·, haji, pamr̥ṣi vatak· I jro, Ityaivamādi, tan tamā[18] Irikaṁ vanuA sīma I liṅgasuntan·, kevalā bhaṭāra I valaṇḍit·, Ataḥ pramānā ri sadrabya-hajinya kabaiḥ samaṅkana Ikaṁ sukhaduḥkha kady aṅgāniṁ mayaṁ tan· pavvaḥ valu rumambat· riṁ natar· vipati vaṅkai kābunan· rāḥ kasa vur vākcapalā duhilatan· hidu ka sirat· hastacapala pādacapala mamijilakan turaḥniṁ kikir· mamuk· mamuṁpaṁ ludan· tu ta n· ḍaṇḍa kuḍa ṇḍa bhaṇḍihalādi, bhaṭāra I valaṇḍit· Ataḥ parānani drabya-hajinya, kunaṁ Ikaṁ miśra mañambul· mañavriṁ maṁlākha maṅapus· mapahaṅa n· maṅubar· matarub· maṁgula maṁ dyun· maṁhapu manula maruṁki mapayuṁ vlu mopiḥ ma ka jaṁ makisi mamubut· maṅanamm-anam· ma navaṁ manahab· mamisaṇḍuṁ makala-ka lā kāpva ya tribhāgān· drabya-hajinya sadūmān· marā I bhaṭāra sadūmān marā I saṁ makmita n· sīma sa dūmān· mara I saṁ maṅilala drabya haji, kapva Ikaṁ masambyavahāra hana Iṁ sīma hinīṅan· kvehanya Anuṁ tan· knāna drabya haji tluṁ tuhā n· I masambyavahāra yan paṅulaṁ kbo 30 sapi 40 vḍus· 80 Aṇḍaḥ savantayan· maguluṅan· tluṁ pasaṁ , maṅaraḥ , tluṁ lumpaṁ Atitiḥ saku lit· , paṇḍai tluṁ Ububan·, Uṇḍahagi satuhān·, paḍahi tluṁ taṅkilan·, macadar pataṁ pa cadaran· para hu 1 , masuṁhara 3 ta n patuṇḍāna yāpvan pinikul· dagaṅa nya kady aṅgāniṁ mabasana masayaṁ, makacapuri maṅuñjal· makapas· vuṅkuḍu vsi, tambaga gaṅsa timaḥ vuyaḥ paḍat· lṅa bras gula pamaja bsa r· kasumba saprakāraniṁ dval pinikul· kalima bantal· Iṁ satu hā p n· Ataḥ pikul-pikullananya Iṁ sasīma, Ikanaṁ samaṁkana tan· knāna de saṁ maṅilala drabya haji saparānanya sadeśanya yāpvan· lviḥ saṁkerikanaṁ knāna sakalviḥnya sodhăra haji tan· Adhikāna Irikaṁ kāla maṅasəAkan· Ikaṁ rāma I liṅga suntan· pasak-pasak· I śrī ma[hā]rāja mas· su 5 , vḍihan tapis· yu 1 , rakai sirikan· pu Amarendra, rakai vka pu balyaṁ , sa mgat· moma h-umaḥ kāliḥ maḍaṇḍər· A ṅgəhan· tiruAn· ḍapunta taritip· vinaiḥ pa sak-pasak· mas· su 1 mā  4 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, Amrāt i havaṁ vicakṣaṇa maṁhūri pu paṇ ḍa muAn· tilimpik pu dhanuka vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· 10 vḍihan· cadar· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vadiha ti saṁ dinakara makudur· pu balavān· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak·  vḍihan· cadar· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, hujuṁ Irikaṁ kāla pu madh u ra vinaiḥ pasak-pasak·   vḍiha n· ca dar·   tu hān· I hujuṁ vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su 1 mā 4 kinabaihanira, tuhān i vadihati mira-miraḥ saṁ halaṁ pa h u[ṁ halaran· saṁ lbur·] poḥ tuhān i makudur· vatu valaiṁ saṁ variṅin·, vatu kiluṁ saṁ tpusan· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 10 vḍihan· cadar· hlai  sovaṁ-sovaṁ, paṅuraṁ I vadihati saṁ ra vuṅū, Anuṅgū saṁ hovaṁka, paṅuraṁ I makudur· saṁ ra kbəl·, Anuṅgū saṁ kulumpaṁ vinaiḥ pasak· mā 5 vḍihan, cadar· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, tuhān iṁ pakaraṇān, juru kanayakān· I hi no samgat· gunuṅa n·, juru vadvā rarai saṁ ra guyu, juru kalula pu bali, kaṇḍamuhi saṁ geṣṭa, parujar· Iṁ sirikan hujuṁ galuḥ I vka viri diḥ I kanuruhan· saṁ rokat·, I sbaṁ saṁ bimala, I bavaṁ saṁ satyaka, I maḍaṇḍar saṁ cakra, Iy a ṅgə han· saṁ kuruhan·, I tiruAn· saṁ sumuḍan· ḍapunta saṅgama, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su 1 mā 4 kinabaihanira, saṁ citralekha I hino vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su 1 mā 4 kinabaihanira, lumaku manusuk· I makudur, saṁ rā ma, lumaku manusuk· I vadihati saṁ Antagi vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su 1 mā 4 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, pa tiḥ juru kāliḥ vasaḥ saṁ kayu matəb·, kuci saṁ campaluk· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 4 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, parujarnya piṁsor hyaṁ pa  sovaṁ-sovaṁ , patiḥ kahyūnan· ri hujuṁ rikaṁ kāla saṁ ḍampil· ramani karambət· Back saṁ bāṅi ramani bharana, patiḥ maṁhāmbin· saṁ śaka, patiḥ pamgat· saṁ mambaṁ, vinaiḥ pasa k-pasak· mā 10 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, saṅ ambrivā ramani marapi vinaiḥ pasak· mas· su 1 mā 4 vḍihan· yu 1 patiḥ lampuran· saṁ jarā, saṁ lagi, saṁ juraṁ bana, saṁ ḍaṅkal·, saṁ harivaṅśa, vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 4 vḍihan yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, parujar pa tiḥ si pastika siy arik· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 4 vḍihan· hlai 1  sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vahuta kamasihan· ri hujuṁ rikaṁ kāla saṁ putra vinaiḥ pasak-pasak·, mas· su 1 mā 4 vḍihan· yu 1 , vahuta paṅuñjaṅan· ri hujuṁ rikaṁ kā la saṁ valija bapani kḍu- kḍu saṁ vidya vi naiḥ pasak-pasak· mas· su 5 , vḍihan· yu 5 , kinabaihanira nayaka lampu ran muAṁ vahuta la gu ntan· patiḥ I kanuruhan· Umilu pinakasākṣiniṁ manusuk ṣī ma saṁ hi ra nya vinaiḥ pa sak-pasak· mā 4 vḍihan· yu 1 saṁ mā dhava bapani damū vvaṁ ri tampuran· vinaiḥ pasak· mā 4 vḍi han· yu 1 parujar· patiḥ I kanuru han·, si Uṅgara vinaiḥ pasak mā 1  vḍihan· hlai 1 patiḥ I tugaran· milu pinakasākṣiniṁ manusuk· saṁ cəṅgar· vi naiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 4 vḍihan· yu 1  vahuta I kanuruhan· paṅvahan· saṁ vagai vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 4 vḍi _han· hlai 1 tuhān iṁ kanayakān· I siri kan· saṁ dhara, citralekha saṁ tulus· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 4  vḍihan· yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, rāma tpi si riṁ milu pinakasā kṣīniṁ manusuk· sīma, I sumari si pā da, I vura ku tan· si baṇḍak·, I himad· si sambur·, I mliṁ-mliṁ, si kuman·, I talijuṅan· si lele, I paṅavān· I kanuruha n· si ca pa, I paṅavān· I hujuṁ si banava kapva vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· mā 1 ku 2 vḍiha n· yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, saṁ ra guṇuṁ vinaiḥ pasak· mā 3 vḍihan· hlai 1 gu ru hyaṁ lambuhuyu vinaiḥ mā 1 , vḍihan· hlai 1 riṇḍi si diṅā da, vinaiḥ pasak· mā 2 vḍihan· hlai 1 I tlasniṁ mavaiḥ pasak-pa sa k· muAṁ vḍihan· I sira kabaiḥ pinarnaḥ Ikanaṁ saji I saṁ makudur· I sorniṁ vitāna maṅārgha saṁ pina kaviku sumaṅaskāra Ikā saṁ hyaṁ susuk· muAṁ kulumpaṁ maṁḍiri ta saṁ makudur· maṅañja li I saṁ hyaṁ təAs· maluṅguḥ I so rniṁ vitāna man·dlān· pāḍa masiṁhəl· vḍihan· yu 1 humaR̥ppakan· saṁ hyaṁ təAs·, tumūt· ta saṁ vadihati, lumkas ta saṁ makudur· maṅuyut· manətək· guluniṁ hayām· linaṇḍasakan· Iṁ kulumpaṁ, Amantiṅa kan· han·tlū riṁ vatu sīma, mamaṁmaṁ ma napathe saminaṁmaṁnira daṅū I katguhakna saṁ hyaṁ sīma, Ikanaṁ līṁnira, Īndaḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ I śrī haricandāna Agasti mahā R̥ṣi pūrbva dakṣiṇa paścima Uttara māddhya Ūrdhamadhāḥ ravi śaśi kṣiti jala pavana hutāśana yajamānākāśa dharmma Ahorātra sandhyā hr̥daya yakṣa rākṣasa pisāca, pretāsura garuḍa gan dha rvva catvāri lokapāla yama buruṇa kuvera bāśava muAṁ putra de vatā pañcakusika nandīśvāra mahākāla ṣadvināyaka nāgarājā durggādevī caturāśra, Ananta surendra, Anaṅta[98] hyaṁ kā lamr̥tyu gaṇa bhūta kita prasiddha maṁrakṣaṁ kaḍatvan· śrī mahārāja I mḍaṁ Iṁ bhūmi matarā m· kita U milu masa rīra Umasuk· riṁ sarbvasa rīra kita sakala bhūta sākṣī tumon madoḥ lāva n· mapaR̥ riṁ ra hina riṁ vṅi At R̥ṅə:Ākan· ta Ikiṁ samaya, sapatha sumpaḥ pamaṁmaṁ mami ri kita hiyaṁ kabaiḥ yāva t· Ikanaṁṅ u vaṁ du rācāra tan· mā gam· tan· makmit· Iri kiṁ samaya sapatha sinrahakan· saṁ vahuta hyaṁ kudur· hadyan· hu lu n· matuha rarai laki- laki  vadvan· viku grahasta patiḥ vahuta rāma Asiṁ Umulah-ulaḥ Ikiṁ vanuA sīma I liṅgasunta n·  sinusuk· kan· śrī mahārāja rakai hino pu siṇḍok śrī Īśānavikrama dharmmotuṅgadeva I bha ṭāra   I valaṇḍit· I dlā hanīṁ dlāha An· babakan ta ya ṅuni veḥ yan· davuta sa ṁ hyaṁ vatu sī ma tasmāt· kabvatakna nya patyanantā ta ya ka muṁ hyaṁ deyantat patīya tat· tano li ha I vuntat·  tat· tiṅhala I liku ran· taruṁ riṁ A dgan ta mpyal· I viraṅan· Uva hi I tṅanan· tutuḥ tu ṇḍunya blaḥ kapālanya sbittakan· vtaṁnya rantan· Ususnya vtuA ka ṇ ḍalmanya ḍuḍuk· hatinya I num rāḥ nya təhər· pəpəddakan· vkasakan· prānantika, yan para ya ri ṅ a las paṅ anan deniṁ moṁ patu kan· deni ṅ ulā turuṅā, puliraknaniṁ devamanyuḥ yan· para ya ri tgal· sambərniṁ glap tan pahudan· sampallan deniṁ rakṣa sa paṅananniṁ vuṅgal si pamuṅvan· ta molaḥ ya ri sthananya sarbvaroga rumañcha ya A raḥ ta kita hyaṁ kusika ga_rga metr ī kuruṣya pātāñjala suvuk· lor suvu k kidul kulvan· vetan· bvaṅākan· riṅ ākāśā salambitta kan· ri hyaṁ kabaiḥ ti bākan· riṁ mahāsāmudra kla mmakan· riṁ ḍavuha n· Alapan· saṁ hyaṁ jalamm er· duduttann iṁ tuviran· saṁhapniṁ vuhaya, ṅkānaṁṅ mātya Ikanaṁṅ uvvaṁ Anyāya yan· lbuna Ikiṁ vanuA sīma I li ṅgasuntan· Upadrava riṁ devatā bhraṣṭa liputniṁ phīra muli ha riṁkanaṁraka ti bākan· riṁ mahārorava klān· de saṁ yamabala palun de saṁ kiṅkara piṁpitva Ata yan· bimbān· pāpā Ataya saṁsārā sajivakāla salu Īr·niṁ duḥkha paṅguhanya sarŭpaniṁ lara hidappanya sakelikniṁ janma dadyanannya ma vu ka tan tammuAṁ sāma vkasa kan· havu keri r· maṅkana tmahana rikanaṁṅ uvvaṁ lburna Ikiṁ vanuA sīma I liṅgasuntan· Proper right I tlas· saṁ makudur· maṅu yut· masalin· sira ka baiḥ kapva maluṅguḥ Iṁ tkan· pasak· tumūt· krama saṁ hana riṁ kon· patiḥ vahuta rā ma kabayān·, mvaṁ rāma tpi siriṁ kabaiḥ matuha manu Am· laki-laki vadvan· ka niṣṭa māddhyamottama, tan· hana kantun· Ilu manaḍaḥ riṁ paglara n· kinu ran-kuran· InaṁsəAn sku l· dāndānan· hinirusa n· kla- kla Ambil-ambil· ka syan· līt-līt· tlu sānak· sa ṅa-saṅan· haryyas· rumba- ru mbaḥ kuluban· tetis· tu mpuk-tumpuk·, ḍeṁ hañaṁ ḍeṁ ha sin · kakap· huraṁ viluṁluṁ ka ḍivas· ka van· layar-laya r hala-hala hantiga Inariṁ suṇḍa Atak pəhan·, piṇḍa gaṅa n· Iṁ saron· len· saṁkā ri knas· Ivak· prakāra, Anaḍaḥ sira kabaiḥ yathāsukha maṅinu m· siddhū, ciñca, kilaṁ tvak·, piṁti ga sovaṁ, vinuvuhan· tambul· I nañjapan· kuravu kurima Asam·  dvad va l· madulur· mala riḥ Umaṁsə:  taṁ jnu skar·, rujak· Anabəḥ ta saṁ  matuvuṁ maṁḍiri ta sira kabaiḥ pa tiḥ pramukha, kapva manambaḥ humara p· I sakahanān· śrī mahārāja I  hu vus·niṁ manambaḥ maṅiga l· ya tha kra ma tuvuṁ br̥kuk· gaṇḍiṁ rā va ṇa ha sta, sampun·niṁ maṅi gal· maṇḍa k· muvaḥ Umaṁsə: taṁ baṁlus· linarihan· piṁ tiga sovaṁ, matlasan· sira kabeḥ ka pva Umuliḥ riy umaḥnira //

--- TRANSLATION ---
 


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 7: DHARMA_INSIDENKMula-Malurung.xml
Title: Mula-Malurung
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: maṅhuri|nakṣatra|vāra|pūjā|sīma|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa|svargga
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
       nama śivaya   svasti śakavarṣātīta, Iṁ śaka, 1177 , mārggaśiramāsa, tithi pañcada śi śuklapakṣa, ma , U , bu , vara,  juluṁ, grahacāra, nairitistha, Adrānakṣatra, śūlabhr̥tdevata, baruṇamaṇḍa la, Indrayoga, kuverapārvveśa, karkkaṭarāśi, visvabasumuhūrtta, vavakaraṇa, Irika divaśāny ājñā pādu  ka śrī mahārāja, sakvaiḥnira kr̥tapratiṣṭa dainira narāryya sminiṁ rāt, riṁ sanagarasanagara, makamukhya śrī mahārāja, śrīlokavijayapuruṣottamavīrāṣṭabasudevādhipānivāryyavīryyaninditaparakrama mūrdva janamottuṅgadeva, kr̥tānagarābhiṣekanāmalañchana, makapurassārānugrahanira bhaṭāra parameśvara , śrīsakalayavadvīpanaranāthādiguru , sira saṁ pinakaguru dainiṁ samaptagrāma, samastakṣatriya, makādi sa  kvaiḥnira prabhū ṅke riṁ nūṣa java, mvaṁ makottuṅgānugrahanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt, śrīyavadvīpasamastarājādi , prakaśitasminiṁrāt·nā viśeṣāninditasaṅgrāmaparakramadigvijayānivāryyavīryya snaha nāmottuṅgadeva malañchana, tinaḍaḥ dainira sama ṣatriya, makādi rakryan mahāmantrī hino, rakryan mahāmantrī sirikan·, ra k stak kryan mahāmantrī halu, Umiṅsor i para taṇḍa rakryan· riṁ pakirākiran makādi saṁ pamgat i tirvan·, puspapāta ḍa ṅ ācāryya jayaṅga, saṁ pamgat iṅ kaṇḍamuhi, puspapāta ḍaṅ ācāryya marmmananda, saṁ pamgat i maṅhuri, puspapāta ḍaṅ ā cāryyagraja, tlas karuhun saṁ rāmapati, mapañji siṅharṣa, An· Aki begos·, makasirkasi raṅgaḥ vahas ·, mapa ñji buliṇḍaḥ, Apasəṅgahan saṁ prāṇarāja, padamlakna saṁ hyaṁ rājapraśasti, Umuṅgveṅ upala, tāmbra, ripta kunaṁ, sa 2 mbhanda, gati saṁ prāṇarāja, An kadi hulun kalilin parṇnaḥ saṁ prāṇarāja, śaivake sira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, tiṅkaḥ saṁ prāṇarāja, śaivaka ri sira kakinira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, sira saṁ līna riṁ ḍāmpa mās·, sira saṁ pinratiṣṭanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, makasvarūpaṁ viṣṇvarccha, na ṅkāne saṁ hyaṁ dharmme kagnəṅan·, makasa jñā narasiṅhanagara, saṁ prāṇarāja, ṅa ṁ pinakahastapāda dai narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, ri kālaniṁ kāryya pratiṣṭa mahābhāra, muvaḥ ri paṁḍirinira rāmanira narāryya, gumantyani paṁḍirinira kakinira, śaivaka saṁ prāṇarāja, ri sira rāmanira sira pāduka saṅ ahulun sa jñānira, sira saṁ tlas pinratiṣṭa makasvarūpaṁ viṣṇvarccha denira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, ṅkāne saṁ hyaṁ dharmma ri kiḍal·, ma ṅa ṁ kanāmadheya narasiṅhāsana, saṁ prāṇarāja lot sāri pinakataṅansukunira, ri kālaniṁ kāryya pratiṣṭa bhūmi  śoddhanādi, mvaṁ ri kālani kapratiṣṭanira pamanirātəhər pinakarāmātuhanira, sira saṁ lineṁ kubvan agə̄ṁ, rāmanira narāryya vaniṁ hyūn·, kakinira rānakira, sira śrī kr̥tānagara, sira makasvarūpaṁ viṣṇvarccha, ṅkāne saṁ hyaṁ dharmme pikatan·, saṁ prāṇarāja muvaḥ pinakahastapāda dai narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, ri kālani bhūmiśoddhanā di, muvaḥ ri kālani kapratiṣṭanira yuyutira, ṅkāne saṁ hyaṁ dharmma ri kalaṁ bret·, saṁ prāṇarāja pinakapura ssārani paṁhuvusakən samahābhārani kāryya, muvaḥ ri kālanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt· Anusuk· dharmma ṅkāne pagə:r·, makanāmadheya narasiṅharājya, saṁ prāṇarāja lot hati pinakaparabvatnira, valuyana taṅ ujar· , Anantara saṅke līnanira pamanira pva, Aṇḍiri ta sira pamanira, sira narāryya guṅ iṁ bhaya, śaivaka saṁ prāṇarā  3 ja ri narāryya guṅ iṁ bhaya, svarggastha pva narāryya guṅ iṁ bhaya, gumanti ta narāryya toḥ jaya, pramaṇa riṁ jagat· kaka sira dai narāryya guṅ iṁ bhaya, paman muvaḥ dai narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, śaivaka muvaḥ saṁ prāṇarāja ri narāryya toḥ jaya, lina pva narāryya toḥ jaya, narāryya sminiṁ rāt ta pinasaṅakən· prajāpatya, dai para śaivaka makādi saṁ pamgat iṁ raṇu kabayān saṅ apañji patipati, makaḍapur ikaṁ nagara tumapəl·, makasiṅhanira pāduka mpu ṅkv iṁ kapuluṅan· sirānavasthā, sthāpaka riṁ kabhairavan·, sira tānusuk saṁ hyaṁ dharmma panaivaśikān riṁ tahən· ma nis·, dinadyakənira kakolikān·, makāṅśa sadr̥vya hajinikaṁ tahən· manis·, tinūtnyan piṇḍah vatə k vuga , makanimitta R̥ṇanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, An digvijayān makasthāpake sira, muvaḥ hana ta sira brāhmaṇa  paramar ve t g ajñā, sira rāghavadeva ṅaranira, Apasəṅgahan· brahmārājaguru, sira ta vineh anusuka dharmma ṅ d sīma svatantra kakolikan·, riṁ bhūmi jaṅgala, Ika maṅaran i hasəm pañjaṁ, lāvan paranakanikaṁ pañjiṁ dharmma ri hu juṁ maṅaran· ryy ayoddhya, mvaṁ hana ta sira maḍhaka ṅaranira, paramayajurvvedajñā, Agamajñā, paramatatvavit· sira ta pinakapurohitanira rānakira, sira śrī kr̥tānagara, pinarivr̥tta ta sira deniṅ anyabrāhmaṇa vedapāra ga, lvirnira, R̥gvedajñā rvvedajñā sāmavedajñā, sinevita ta sira deniṅ anekabhaṭamantrīmukya, makā yū yaju di saṁ pamgat iṁ raṇu kabayān mapañji patipati, saṁ vineh anusuka dharmma sīma svatantra, ṅkāneṁ bhūmi jaṅgala, ma kanāmāṁ kr̥ṣṇapura, saṁ rāmapati, mapañji siṅharṣa, Apatih i sira śrī śāstrajaya, saṁ sinuṅ anusuka dharmma sīma sva 4 tantra, ṅkāneṁ bhūmi kaḍiri, makanāma mitrapuri, saṅ apañji nirākāra, dmuṁ riṁ jaṅgala, sumivī śrī harṣavijaya, saṁ vineh anusuka dharmma sīma svatantra, ṅkāne bhūmi jaṅgala, makasa jñā surāsana, saṅ apañji dūtarāga, prahajya ṅa ṁ n·, saṁ vineh anusuka dharmma sīma sva t antra, ṅkāneṁ bhūmi vetaniṁ kavi, makasaṁjñā kr̥tāsana, saṅ apañji samaka, A patihira narapati kr̥tānagara, saṁ Inanugrahan anusuka sīma svatantra, ṅkāneṁ bhūmi jaṅgala, makanāmaṁ harija ya, saṅ apañji siṅanambat·, Apatih i vuravan·, Amaṅku kaprabhūniraji jayakatyə:ṁ, saṁ vineh anusuka dharmma sī ma svatantra, ṅkāneṁ bhūmi kaḍiri, Ataganikaṁ vahuta rāma triṇi taṇḍa, makasaṁjñā kr̥ṣṇāsana, tlas karuhun saṁ prāṇarāja, saṁ nityadhirots hāṅ a ā locitta nayopāya riṅ ahorātra, dumadyakən· svāsthāniṁ rāt· a ā  ṅūniṅ[ū]ni kadigvijayanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, samaṅkāna pinakādiniṁ śaivaka ri sira narāryya sminiṁ rā t·, kapva talvilvihan kabhaktin·, Aṅulahakən· dharmmaniṁ śaivaka saptati, dvāra saṁ prāṇarāja tan· kevəhan amaṁ hyaṅakən sakapti ni rovaṅira śaivaka, ri sira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, paṅavruhana yan maṅkana, paḍa kr̥tānu graha sakveh iṁ pinakādiniṁ śaivaka samaṅkā lvirnira, hatur saṁ prāṇarāja nimittanikā, tuhun saṁ prāṇarāja ju ga tapvan kr̥tānugraha ri kasusukaniṁ sīma, denira saṁ prabhu saṁ tlas kapratiṣṭa dai narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, Ikan maṅka na, su kh a saṁ prāṇarāja, maṅkin dhirotsaha, An ni ta bahunāyaka, śaivaka ri rovaṁniṅ aśaivaka, mvaṁ śai ka əkā vaka ri sakveḥnira prabhu ṅke riṁ nūṣa java, mvaṅ i madhura, ṅūniṅūni kasuṣṭubhaktin· saṁ prāṇarāja ri sira narā  5 ryya sminiṁ rāt·, Āpan tan hana deva makādiṁ brahmā viṣṇu maheśvara, An· lena saṅke sira narāryya smi niṁ rāt·, vnaṅ aṅanugrahakna sakāptiniṁ śaivaka mahābhāra ri sira, mvaṁ vnaṅ aṁrākṣa yogya rākṣan·, An· ḍaṇḍa yogya ḍaṇḍan·, rumākṣaṁ sarvvadharmma, mūnarj ī vakən sahananiṁ dharmma parikṣiṇa, tan paveḥ ryy abhicaruka niṁ lmaḥ bala, lāvan sahananiṁ sīma parasīma, kalaṁ, kalagyan·, kamūlan·, kakurugan·, kuṭi vihāra, śā la, parhyaṅan·, karṣyan·, Umaluyakən· pūrvvasthitinya juga sira, kumatuturakən sakramanya ṅūni riṁ muhun mala pa, makanimitta vdiniran kacāmpurana pamaṅunira dharmma, Apituvi praśāsti kadānaśūranira, Asaṅkyeya saṁ brahmāṇa kr̥tadānapratigraha saṅke sira, lumrā ta kirttyanurāganira riṁ rāt·, śaratkālapūrṇnaca ndrajyotsnănibha, An kadi ta dilaḥniṁ pū r ṇnaśaśāṅka ri kālaniṁ lahru, prakāśa ta kaśūradhīrasiṅhanira, Anivāryyavīryyanira, Aninditaparakramanira riṁ raṇāṅga, maddhyăhnādityakarasutaikṣṇyapratima, An ka di ta sătiśayani panas i tejaniṅ ăditya ri kālaniṁ tṅaḥṅ vai, saṁsiptanya, śūra śakti vāni sira riṁ raṇāṅga maṅkāna hiḍəp saṁ prāṇarāja riṁ svahr̥daya, dumeḥ saṁ prāṇarāja maṅkāna, yāvat hana sira puruṣa vnaṅ aṅanugra hakna sakahyuniṁ śaivaka ri sira, sira paśarīraniṁ sarvvadeva makādiṁ trideva, sira mātā, sira pitā, sira guru, Ikā ta dvāra saṁ prāṇarāja, Ekacitta gumavayakən· guru , An· śaivaka ri sira narāryya suśruṣān· śuśrūṣā sminiṁ rāt·, muvaḥ tan hana mātāpitā, guru, An lena saṅkeṁ kadi tiṅkahira sinevaka paḍa lāvan sira na 6 rāryya sminiṁ rāt·, paṅavruhana yan maṅkana, katon daini kaniṣṭamaddhyamottama, saṁ prāṇarāja nityasaṁsa rgga mvaṁ saṁ rāmapati, Anaṅkil· ri sira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, Aṅ locitta nayopāya, mvaṁṅ aṁlampahakən· bala ă ā kośavāhana, dumadyakən· sthīratarani paluṅguḥnira saṁ prabhu riṁ maṇikanakasiṅhāsana, mvaṁ dumadyakən· vr̥ ddhiniṁ yaśānurāganira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, prakāśita riṁ nūṣa paranūṣa, tinūt i parāmadigvijayanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, Anmahakən savalələ̄niṁ sayavadvīpamaṇḍala, Anūluyani nūṣāntara, nāṁ madhura, makavyakti sira śrī harṣavijaya, parṇnaḥ pahulunan· dainira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, Inandəlakən· muṅgveṁ ratnakanakasiṅhā sana, ṅkāneṁ bhūmi jaṅgala, putranira saṅ apañjy adimūrtti, rakryan· kulup kuda, Ipe denira narāryya sminiṁ  rāt·, Inadgakən· prahajyan· ṅkāneṁ nagara madhura, ri kāla saṅ apañjy ādimūrtti mare tumapəl·, sira narā ryya kiraṇa, săkṣăt ātmajanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, pinratiṣṭa juru lamajaṁ, pinasaṅakən· jagatpālaka, ṅkā neṁ nagara lamajaṁ, sira narāryya mūrddhaja, Ătmajanira muvaḥ, sira śrī kr̥tānagara nāmaniran inabhi eka, pi ś ṣ nasaṅakən· ṅkāneṁ maṇikanakasiṅhāsana, riṁ nagara daha, sinevitaniṁ bhūmi kaḍiri, sira turuk bali, putrī nira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, pinakaparameśvarīnira śrī jayakatyəṁ, săkṣăt kapvanakanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt· sira pinratiṣṭa ṅkāneṁ maṇikanakasiṅhāsana, makanagare glaṁglaṁ, sinevita dainikaṁ sakalabhūmi vuravā n·, sira śrī ratnarāja, parṇnah ari vvaṁ sānak amisan de narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, pinratiṣṭa ṅkāneṁ maṇikanakasiṅhā 7 sana, ri ṁ rājya i moroṇo, sira śrī narajaya, parṇnah aryy amisan dai narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, sirenandəla kən· riṁ maṇikanakasiṅhāsana, ṅkāneṁ nagara ri hriṁ, sira śrī sabhājaya, parṇnah aryy amisan dai narāryya sminiṁ rā t·, sira pinratiṣṭa ṅkāneṁ maṇi kanakasiṅhāsana, ri nagara lva, sira saṁ prabhu samaṅkana lvirnira, kapva ta sira tlas kr̥ tābhiṣeka dainira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, ṅkāne nagaranira sovaṁsovaṁ, saṁ prāṇarāja lot sāri lina mpahakənira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, tūtniṁ senavr̥nda śaivaka, yadyan· brāhmaṇa, R̥ṣi, śaiva, sogata, A təhər amrayogakən sādhana, sādhananiṁ kāryya mahābhāra, rājābhiṣekādi, Āpan tan hana śaivaka kadi saṁ prāṇarāja, śaivaka ri sira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, tan vruh anəṅgaḥ maṅgalya, tan· vruh anəṅgah alapā, ta n vruh anəṅgaḥ dūrggama, yāvat inutusniṁ kadi sira śinevaka, lumampaḥ juga tan asuna, nimitta saṁ prāṇarā jān maṅkana, Āpan niyatāmaṅguhakən abhyudāya riṅ ihātra parātra, Ikaṁ vvaṁ nityaṅūlahakən· dharmmaniṁ śai vaka saptati, An maṅkana lkas i saṁ prāṇarāja śaivaka, sārisaryy aṅlampahakən sapaṅutusira narāryya sminiṁ rā t·, Apituvy ankani ṣeṣṭa sādhyani manaḥnira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, riṁ vāhyădhyātmika, Ikān maṅkana, tapvan saṁ prāṇarāja Inanugrahan· ri kasusukaniṁ sīma, Ika ta dvāra sama śaivaka labdheṣṭaprayojana, huvus· kr̥tānugraha, makādi saṁ rāmapati, mahəm mālapkna, musapa reṇu caraṇadvayanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, Aṁ hyaṅa turunani varasanmatanira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, Aṅanugrahakna thāni sāvakanya, dadyakna sīma ma 8 pakna I saṁ prāṇarāja, riṁ tadanantara, maR̥k ta sakveḥ saṁ labdhānugraha, makapaṅhulu saṁ rāmapati, riṁ śū nyadeśa, panambah i manə̄manə̄hi lmah i talapakaniṁ kadi bhāvanira devamūrtti lobhāṁhyaṁ tulusani va raprāsāda lmah i talapakan· ra saṅhulun i manə:manə:hiṁ kadi bhāvanira, ndya ta tulusani siḥsanmatanire manə:manə:hira, hilaṅakna duḥkhamanastāpani manə:manə:hira, makadvāra tan samani varaprasāda lmah i tala pakanira, Aṅanugrahakən sukhāsamasama, makādi kasusukaniṁ sīma, ri manə:manə:hira makabehan·, tu hun manə:manə:hira pun prāṇarāja, tapvan inanugrahan sīma de lmah i talapakanira, punikā tāṅde ci ttas litāṅdadyakən· duḥkhamanastāpa, riṁ svahr̥dayani manə:manə:hira sovaṁsovaṁ, An kadi ta manə: kā kha manə:hira kr̥tāghna, kadi tan· vruh iṅ aguṇa, kādi tan guṇagr , kādi svărtha kevala, samaṅkānādini ahi rāhī kaṁ doṣa tumama ri manə:manə:hira, mvaṁ kadi paṅ lmah i talapakan· ra saṅhulun·, yatan pānulus asiḥ tibhedi ktibhedī sanmata lmah i talapakanire manə:manə:hira, saṁsiptani panəmbah i manə:manə:hira makaśirassnāna ra rab i lmah i caraṇadvayaniṁ kadi sira devamūrtti, Aṁhyaṁ turunani varānugraha lmah i talapakanira, Iri pu n· prāṇarāja, makanimitta yogyanipun anugrahana thāni, sathāni rvaṁ thāni dadyakna sīma svatantra, gañja rananipun nitya gumavayakən dharmmaniṁ śaivaka saptatī, makatəmbeyan i sira kakinira, namas te sira bhaṭā ra namaś śivāya, sira saṁ līna riṁ ḍampa kanaka, makāvasāna paṁḍiri lmah i talapakan ra saṅhulun·, An pi 9 nakaikacchātraniṁ bhūvaṇa sayavadvīpamaṇḍala, Anuluyani nūṣāntara, An maṅkana panambaḥ saṁ rāmapati, tan· vavaṁ sirāsaṅgup·, sḍaṅ ekacitta rumasani paramayogyani panambaḥ saṁ rāmapati, Āpan svabhāvaniṁ kadi sira devamūrtti viṣṇvavatāra, tan· vavaṅ asaṅgup·, mvaṁ tan dadi tan paṁR̥ṅə: haturniṁ śaivakāṅdadyakən hi tāvasāna, tan dadi tan pāṅanugrahani śaivakāṁlampahakən kaśaivakan uttama ri sira, riṅ avasāna, tan a davā sah rira, sampun kasaṁsipta yuktini rasani sirat i madhuravacana saṁ rāmapati, Atyantā paramasantu a u ṣṭini manahiṅ hulun makanimitta patut i buddhiniṅ hulun·, lāvan sakināptyakən· ra saṅhulun makabehan·, ndan hana bhedannya matra, Alāmaṅ hulun ahyun asūṅa deśa lor iṁ nagara, makanāmaṁ mūla, mvaṅ i maluruṁ, da dyakna sīmādəg· riṅgita, gañjarakna I saṁ prāṇarāja, sahakāryyana kavnavnaṅaniṁ kadaṅ haji jaṅgala kaḍi ri, mvaṁ vr̥tti savr̥ttiniṁ kadaṁ haji jaṅgala kaḍiri, makādiṅ akarmma, vālyavālya, ri hanani saṁ prabhu mahā bhāra, tūtən i sasantānapratisantāna saṁ prāṇarāja, kadaṅ haji ri dlāhaniṁ dlāha, saṁsiptanya, sahakār yya yana nugrahaniṁ kakadaṅhajyan dainiṅ hulun· maṅanugrahaṇa sīma ri saṁ prāṇarāja, tuhun avdi taṅ hulun li ṅgacchāya ri sira samaprabhu makabehan·, sakvehnira tlas· pinratiṣṭa ṅkāneṁ maṇikanakasiṅhāsana, ma kalarapana kasāmarthyan· ra saṅhulun makabehan ta yan maṅkana , tulusakna pamah uka ra saṅhulun·, ri ārs arṣ yogya ra saṅhulun makabehan muvaḥ, Aṁdulurāṅusapa lbuni pādukanira śrī mahārāja makabehan·   10 makādi sira śrī kr̥tānagara, Amə̄ṅakna pasamagrinira maṅke ri kālani kapūjānira bhaṭāra parameśva ra, An maṅkana rasani sirati maṇikira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, laris ta sama labdheṣṭaprayojana, makapaṅhu lu saṁ rāmapati, humaṇḍəm anambah umusap· lbūni pādukanira śrī mahārāja makabehan·, makapura ssāra sira śrī kr̥tānagara, kathañcana masamagrī sira samaprabhu manaṅkil i sira śrī kr̥tānagara, sanyasā naṅkila ri sira pāduka bhaṭāra, labdhamanoratha saṁ rāmapati, maṅgihakn īṣṭasādhya, ri kapaṅgihira para prabhu masamagrī kāṅkən aṁhaturakna pūjā ri sira pāduka bhaṭāra, makādi sira śrī kr̥tānagara, humatur saṁ rāmapati ri sanmukanira samaprabhu, makanāryyama sira śrī kr̥tānagara, panambaḥ patik haji ri pāduka  śrī mahārāja samudāya, makapram pāduka śrī kr̥tānagara, akai ukhe Amuṅahakna kinaptyaknira rāma pāduka śrī mahārāja, ri hanani jijñāsanira rāma pāduka śrī jagannātha, Aṁdadyakna sīmādəg riṅgita, Ikaṁ deśa lor iṁ nagara makanāma mūla, mvaṅ i maluruṁ, donanya, gañjarakna ri patik haji p n prāṇa a rāja, sahakāryyana tānugrahaniṁ kakadaṁhajyan·, kakadaṁhajyan iṅ kadaṁ haji jaṅgala kaḍiri, tūt  nī ən i santāna prātisantāna patik· haji pun prāṇarājā v aṅka kadaṁ haji, ri dlāhaniṁ dlāha, ndan avaL̥ra varaprāsā da śrī naranātha, kadulura daini varaprāsādanira para prabhu samudāya, vdinira rāma śrī mahārāja liṅga cchāya riṅ kadi bhava pāduka śrī mahārāja jagannātha, Apan pāduka śrī narādhipa sākṣāt makadravyekaṁ pr̥ 11 th ivimaṇḍala, liṅira rāma pāduka śrī jagannātha, mvaṁ pāduka śrī mahārāja vnaṁ vigrahānugraha, An maṅka na parisamāptini hatur saṁ rāmapati, kapva ta sira tumuly asaṅgup·, sama rasany ājñanira, niyatānkani sakinā ptyaknira narāryya sminiṁ rāt·, kunaṁ sira śrī kr̥tānagara juga tan· vavaṅ asaṅgup·, paṅdani kadevamūrttyanira, mva ṁ paṅdainy anugrahani devaviśeṣa ri sira, An sirenahākən sakalajagatpālaka, naranātharāja, A təhər alona lampaḥ turunyājñānira, tan bheda rasanya lāvan· rasanyājñānira samaprabhu, Uva saṁ rāmapati sampun kasaṁsipta rasani psat·psat i madhuravacana ra saṅhulun uva, makāra sābuka ri hanani jijñāsanira ra bapa, Aṁdadyakna sīma svatantrādəg· riṅgita, Irikaṁ deśa lor iṁ nagara, makanāma riṁ mūla, mvaṅ i maluruṁ  mapakna gañjarakne saṁ prāṇarāja, masahakaryya kānugrahaniṁ kakadaṁhajyan·, larapa ny an· vaṅśa kadaṁ ha ji sasantānapratisantāna ra Uva saṁ prāṇarāja, ri dlāhaniṁ dlāha, mvaṁ tūtn iṁ kavnaṁvnaṅaniṁ kadaṁ haji, kavnaṅa knani santānapratisantāna ra Uva saṁ prāṇarāja, ri dlāhaniṁ dlāha, yadyan umuṅgve sīma, Umuṅgveṅ anyadeśa makādi nagara, Atəhər akarmma, valyavalya ri hanani kāryyanira saṁ prabhu mahābhāra, makendhikā pahyaṁ ri sukanira sama prabhu, Anugrahakna sakinaptyaknira ra bapānugrahakne ra Uva saṁ prāṇarāja, Ikā ta kahyuni ra ra bapa maṅkana, pa ri Al halə hulun·, Apituvi, Aṅdadyakən· kastutyanira samaprabhu, mvaṁ haL̥p iṁ kadi sira pra ḍəpiṅ hiḍəpniṅ bhu, yadyan· mahābhāra tovi kahar̥pira ra bapa, ri sira samaprabhu makabehan·, ndan· yan mapakne ra Uva  saṁ prāṇarāja, Ahamsaraṅ hulun uva saṁ rāmapati, ri katkani kāptinira ra bapa dainira samaprabhu, Āpa n kaR̥ṇan hinaturan sukhāsamasama sira makabehan· dainira ra bapa, makasahāye ra Uva saṁ prāṇarāja, mvaṁ kasāmārthyan· ra saṅhulun kabeḥ, Āpan tan hana kadaṁ vargga pahutaṅaniṁ kādi sira prabhu, lena saṅkeṅ amra siddhakən kaprabhunira, mvaṁ dumadyakən karayas t veni keśvaryyanira, sira samaprabhu, paḍāntukira ra bapāmratiṣṭa, ṅkāneṁ maṇikanakamayasiṅhāsana, riṁ nagara sanagara, makasahaye ra Uva saṁ prāṇarāja, ṅuniṅūni kapra bhuniṅ hulun·, nora śevake sira ra bapa, paḍa lāvan· ra Uva saṁ prāṇarāja, lot sari pinakarova ṅira ra bapāṅalocitt ā g uṇa buddhi riṅ ahoratra, katiṅhalan dainiṅ hulun·, An maṅkana, paran ta tan sukha

--- TRANSLATION ---
  TRANSLATION 


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 8: DHARMA_INSIDENKRameswarapura.xml
Title: Rameswarapura charter (1197 Śaka)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: parvvata|maṅhuri|nakṣatra|samudra|vāra|śapatha|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
       svasti, śaka-varṣātīta, 1197 , jyaiṣṭha-māsa, tithi, pañcadaśī śukla-pakṣa, tuṁ , po , ca , vāra gumr̥g·, Uttarastha-grahacāra, mūlā-nakṣatra, toya-devatā, vāyavya-maṇḍala, śukla-yoga, śveta-muhūrtta, viṣṭi-kara ṇa, śaśī-parvveśa, mi una-rāśi, t th Irika divaśany ājñā śrī mahārāja rājādhirājā, dyaḥ Ūrddhaja,  viṣṇu-kula-kamala-va , s na-rāja-haṅsa Aśeṣa-namitāri-bhūpāla-maṇi-makuṭa- ita-śrī-pāda-pīṭha ghr̥rṣ gharṣ ,  sakala-sujana-hr̥daya-kumuda-vikā , sa-karaṇa-sūryya-sad śa ra r̥ sapta-svarṇa-vasundharādhinātha-śiraḥ-kamala-matta-vāraṇa , An-avarata-rajata-kana , ka -ratna-vastra-dā dā na-gaṅgā-pra āha-sannibha-kara j v raṇa-raṅga-madhyāpratihata-bhuja-bala-bhīma , jaya-śrī-viṣṇuvarddhana-sahasra-kiraṇo , pama-sat-putra śrīmat·-śrī-jayavarddhanī-devĭ-samudra-mandarā ,
          śrī kr̥tanagara ala-manthāna-mahāmr̥ta-maya v c -vikramadharmottuṅga-deva nāmarājābhiṣeka, tinaḍaḥ de rakryan mahāmantrī ka , rakryan· mantri triṇī trīṇi          jə:ṁ, 2 , Anapu prāṇa, jə:ṁ, 2 , Aharyyan·, ki 1 , kabayan samaṅanti rampakan·, jə:ṁ 1 , ki 1 , Aṅalihi, jə:ṁ 1 , ka bayan samaṅanti susukun·, jə:ṁ 1 , ki 1 , Aṅalihi, jə:ṁ 1 , maṇḍala, 4 , jə:ṁ 4 , juru buruḥ, jə:ṁ 1 , ki 1 , gusti, jə:ṁ 1 ,
bu ruḥ Anama-ratā, 3 , jə:ṁ 1 , ki 1 , juru buruḥ susukun·, jə:ṁ 1 , gusti, ki 1 , jagulan·, jə:ṁ 1 , malas·, jə:ṁ 1 ,
Apa⌈ ṇḍe vsi, jə: ṁ  1 , paṅakan·, ki 1 , Amalantə:n·, ki 1 , piṇḍa savaḥ, kadmak·, cā 2 , kunə:ṅ ikaṁ śeṣa, ya teka pa rṇaḥ kaputrāṅśanani santāna pratisantāna śrī brahmarāja, mvaṅ ikaṁ Uliḥniṅ amabaki, kunə:ṅ ikaṁ gagā, kubvan·, pa rṇaḥ kaputrāṅśan ika, kunə:ṁ parimāṇani lmaḥ saṁ hyaṁ dharmma riṁ śrĭ rāmeśvarapura, riṁ pūrvva, Asiḍaktan lavan kijaṅan·, maṅi  dul mnə:r· tkeṁ juraṁ, Asiḍaktan lavan kijaṅan·, Aniku lalavā maṅetan aṅidul atūt· juraṁ, ḍpa nə a 679 , Akālihan· lvaḥ Asiḍaktan· lavan kijaṅan·, maṅidul·, ḍpa 96 , tumurun iṁ juraṁ, Asiḍaktan lavan kijaṅan·, maṅidul aṅulvan· A 6 tūt· juraṁ, ḍpa 340 , Akālihan· lvaḥ Asiḍaktan· lavan kijaṅan·, mə:nta akeṁ juraṁ, Akāra, ḍpa s s s 5 , tkeṅ āgneya, kulumpaṁ ri ra ṁ R̥ bañjar·, vetan kijaṅan·, kidul· blut·, maṅulvan sakeṅ āgneya, kiduliṁ juraṁ, ḍpa 5 , tkeṁ dakṣiṇa, Asi ḍaktan lavan· blut·, maṅulvan· sakeṁ dakṣiṇa, kidulniṁ lvaḥ, ḍpa 5 , tkeṁ nairiti, Asiḍaktan· lavan· blut·, maṅa lor· sakeṁ nairiti, Amgat· lvaḥ, ḍpa 175 , Asiḍaktan lavan· blut·, mluk· maṅulvan aṅalor· tkeṁ lvaḥ, ḍpa 16 , Asiḍaktan lavan· blut·, maṅalor amgat· lvaḥ, ḍpa 0 340 , Asiḍaktan lavan· pagə:r·, mlu k · maṅetan aṅalor· , ḍpa 80 , Asiḍaktan· lavan· soso, maṅalor amnə:r·, tkeṁ paścima, ḍpa 110 , Asiḍaktan· lavan· so so, Aniku lalavā maṅulvan·, ḍpa 60 , Asiḍ p aktan· lavan· soso, Aniku lalavā maṅalor amnə:r· , ḍpa 840 , Asiḍaktan i talaga, Aniku lalavā maṅulvan·, ḍpa 18 , Asiḍaktan lavan talaga, Aniku lala      mambaṁ, huñjə:man·, śenămuka, varahan· muka, paḍahi, kecaka, tarimba n· , mabañ j val·, mata pukan·, mariṅgit·, salahan·, vargga I daL̥m·, sapinakavargga ya, sadeśa saṅkanya, sapravr̥ ttinya, tāvat· ya Umuṅgu ri saṁ hyaṁ dharmma, saṁ hyaṁ dharmma lavan· sama sānak· pramāṇerika kabeḥ, muvah ikaṅ asambyāvahāra dravya hyaṁ dharmma, hiniṅanan· kveḥ kḍiknya, Ann ikaṁ tigaṁ kabayan·, sa saṁ riṁ sasambyāvahāra, Abhāṣaṇa tigaṁ ḍasar·, Aṅavari tigaṁ ḍasar·, Akacapuri tigaṁ ḍasar·, A carakī, tigaṁ ḍasar·, pamadapadan· parahu tuṅgal·, banava tuṅgal·, saha tuṇḍan·, Ahilira n· tigaṁ parahu, Abakul· griḥ tigaṁ kabayan·, sārathī tigaṁ kabayan·, vuyaḥ, lṅa, luruṅa n·, klə:t ə k·, sə:R̥ḥ, vvaḥ, sarvvahə:mbu, Acadar·, Amut ə r ti ga ṁ lumpaṁ, Amaraṅgi rvaṁ pavindvan·,   9 Apaṇḍe vsi rvaṅ ububan·, Alukis· rvaṁ pajaran·, Apaṇḍe ḍaḍap· rvaṁ gusalī, Apaṇḍe ma s· rvaṁ gusalī, Apaṇḍe salaka rvaṁ gusalī, Apaṇḍe tamra, Apaṇḍe siṅyasiṅyan·, Apa⌈ ṇḍe daṁ, rvaṁ gusalī sovaṁ, Apaḍahi, rva ṁ taṅkilan·, Aguluṅan·, guluṅan·, tan kaknāna dra rva rvaṁ vya haji saparanyādval avli, yapvan· lviḥ sakeṁ ri kaknana dravya haji, de saṁ makə:kran· ya, ya n maṅulaṁ kbo, 20 , kbonya, yan maṅulaṁ sapi, 40 , sapinya, yan maṅulaṁ vḍus·, 80 , vḍusnya, ya n maṅulaṁ celeṁ, 2 , vurugan· celeṅanya, yan maṅulaṅ itik·, vanteyan· Itikanya, sapara rva rvaṁ nya deśa, sodara haji, ndan· makmitana ta ya tulis·, maṅka lviranya, yan· L̥viḥ saṅke paṅhī ṅan iriya, knāna dravya haji de saṁ makə:kran· ya, tuhun kavnaṅakna sama sānak· savka saṁ hyaṁ dha    petə:n alapə:n· patyana, tan kaparadātaḥ sama sānak·, yan tan paṅə:takə̄n·, muvaḥ vnaṅ a naṅgapana maliṁ, kīlalanə:n· juga Ikaṁ dravya, yan· vruḥ saṁ madravya, tan· ḍə:ṇḍanə:n·, muvaḥ yan hana kavula sama sānak·, pavvaṅan·, braya, vka kunə: ṁ , patyana makanimitta kaḍuṣṭanya, tumib be kavaṁvaṅanya juga, tan kaparadātaḥ sama sānak· samudāya, muvaḥ UṅsiR̥n iṅ ahutaṁ tan· hīR̥n· , katmva tagihə:n·, puhakana, mā  1 , riṁ, sū  1 , Aṅkə:n· tahun·, samaṅkana kinavnaṅakə:n· sama sāna k· savka śrī brahmarājā ḍaṁ hyaṁ dharaṇidhara, Umuṅgv i saṁ hyaṁ dharmma ri śrī rāmeśvarapura, prasiddha pva kolah-ulahan saṁ hyaṁ dharmma riṁ śrī rāmeśvarapura, maṅhaturakə:n· ta śrī brahmarājā ḍaṁ hyaṁ dharaṇidhara, pamūrṣita, kā , 1 , sū  5 , vḍihan·, yuga, ri śrī mahārāja, muvaḥ śrī brahmarājā ḍaṁ hyaṁ dharaṇidhara, maṅhaturakə:n· pamū 11 rṣita, kā  1 , sū  5 , vḍihan·, yuga, ri bhaṭāra śrī narasiṅhamūrtti, para dvija sama saṅkadhara, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, , sū  1 , mā  4 , sovaṁ, salimput·, yuga, sovaṁ, para mpuṅku samasaṅkadhara, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , sovaṁ, salimput·, yuga, sovaṁ, muvaḥ rakryān apatiḥ, mapañjy āṅragani, Inaṅsyə: n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , vḍihan·, yuga, rakryān· dmuṁ, mapañji vipakṣa, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , vḍihan·, yuga, rakryan kanuruhan·, mapañjy ānurida, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , vḍihan· , yuga, tan kavuntat· saṁ pamgə:t i tirvan·, mapañji parama, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , sali mput·, yuga, pamgə:t iṅ kaṇḍamuhi, mapañji nirdeśa, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sa saṁ sū  1 , mā  4 , salimpu t·, yuga, saṁ pamgə:t iṁ maṅhuri, mapañji salaḥ smu, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , salimput· yuga, saṁ pamgə̄t iṁ laṅka, sinuṅan· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, sū  1 , mā  4 , vḍihan·, sahle, samaṅkana matuṅgal·tuṅgal· ri narama taṇḍa rakryān· riṁ pakirakirān· makab ai han·, Inaṅsyə:n· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, muvah ika grāma pinakasakṣī sinuṅan· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, buyut i kijaṅan· sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , b uyu t· riṁ blut·, sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i soso, sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan· , 1 , buyut i talaga, sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i pabāṅan· sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i maṅnə:b· sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i roṇḍon· sinu ṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i kali sinuṅan· sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , bu yut i gubar sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i ṅ andoḥ sinuṅan· pirak·, mā  1 , vḍi 12 han·, 1 , juru ri lala ki lumbaṁ sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ri kalimunan· j ntur palu sinuṅan· i a pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ri gal u gur· kbo rambiṅan·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ri ka varen· kbo sajareṁ, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ri hijo, ki ṭə:L̥ṁ, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2  , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ri suka lagu kbo ḍuṅkul· sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru riṁ lvir lvirniṁ , juru ri mə:mə: vrarggaji vargga haji li kbo ḍalaṁ sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru riṁ R̥caḥ L̥mbu hijo, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru riṅ ahoṁ kbo bara, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru papare, gagak· baruṁ, sinuṅan· pira k·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ri sumbul·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , lvirniṁ haji, buyut iṁ same sāmya pamaṅgihan· kb v o miL̥t·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i ḍiṅḍiṁ, raṅgaḥ bāmā, sinuṅan· pi rak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i talaga ḍalaṅ sara, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , bu yut i paha ṁ , sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i həmbal·, gagak sasaren·, sinuṅan· pira k·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i və:ñcaran·, gagak· jinə:mur·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , ka pvekaṁ sinuṅan· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, ku  2 , sovaṁ, vḍihan·, 1 , sovaṁ, lvirniṁ juru jasun· vuṅkal·,
juru sa⌈ sā kapuluṅan·, jantur məṅə:ṁ, sinuṅan· pirak·, me mya ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i paḍameyan·, gagak· moleṁ , sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i tuḍan·, gajaḥ lalatu, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan· , 1 , buyut i paṇḍakan·, kalāṅavur·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i bataṁ, kalāṅavu r·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i tulaṅan·, L̥mbu kakas·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍi 13 han·, 1 , buyut i vvatan·n mās·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , kapvekaṁ sinuṅan· pasə:k pagə: ḥ ku  2 , sovaṁ, vḍihan·, 1 , sovaṁ, lvirniṁ tani juru I L̥mbaḥ, karabit·, samgə:t· juru same, L̥ paṅ u si, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i timə:s· buyut· cara, ki vajvaṁ, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i paguyaṅan·, kulāṅus·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i paki s·, kbo hañja-hañja, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i bras·, kbo jantur·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i sirikan·, raṅgaḥ mugə:r·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i juṅalaṁ, L̥mbu kaduṅus·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , buyut i ptuṁ, raṅgah amvar·, sinu ṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , lvirniṁ tani juru paṅkaḥ, juru kidul· buyut i gə:ṇḍoṁ, raṅgaḥ vadva,  sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru ma , buyut i vadehati, ki mara, sinuṅan· pirak·, de dhya ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , juru lor· buyut i vuruṅkud·, buyut· kbo ragen·, sinuṅan· pirak·, ku  2 , vḍihan·, 1 , kapvaṁ sinuṅan· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, ku  2 , sovaṁ, vḍihan·, 1 , sovaṁ, ri huvusniṅ adum· pasə:k pagə:ḥ, tiniṅkaḥ  saji-saji samgə:t· paṅuraṁ, makudur·, Iṁ sorniṁ turumbukan·, ri tṅaḥni ṁ kalaṅan·, saha vidhi-vidhānaniṅ anu suk· dharmmasĭma riṁ lagi, mamujā ta saṁ viku ri vidikvidik·, ri hu amujā, maṁṇḍiri ta samgə:t· ryy ayə:m tyə: niṅ s vus s·,marasuk· kalambi haji, tlas· motta , mamukan-mukan· bandhana, ri sorniṁ turumbukan·, mandə:lan· ṅga R̥ rāsa pāda, InaR̥pakə̄n· deniṁ piṅhey akurug ānak thani rāmarāma sakaviṅkiṁ riṁ siriṁ samadāya, pinakasăkṣĭ ri ka susukan· saṁ hyaṁ dharmma riṁ śrī rāmeśvarapura, lumkas ta saṁ makurug· kabeḥ maṅuyut-uyut·, mantə:k· gulu 14 ni hayaṁ, mamantiṅakə:n· hantiga, linaṇḍə:sakə:n·, ri saṁ hyaṁ vatu susuk·, mamaṁmaṁ manapathe, Aum̐ Indaḥ ta kita kamu hyam̐ mahar̥ṣi, pūrvva dakṣiṇa, paścima, Aricandanāgāsti haricandana Agastya , ravi śaśī Utara maddhya, moddhāmadaḥ Uttaramadhyamordhvādhaḥ kṣity āpas tejo kāśa dharmmāhorātra sandhyātraya, piśāca, pretāsura garuḍa gandha yakṣasa yakṣa rākṣasa rvva ki  nara ran n mahora yama baruṇa kuvera a bh g śava, putra devatā, kuśika gargga metri kuruṣya pā bhā vā tañjala, nandĭśvara mahākāla, ṣ advināya, nāgarāja durggadevī, caturaśraya, Ananta hyaṁ kā lamr̥tyu, bhŭtagaṇa, sahananta rumākṣā sakalabhūmimaṇḍala, kita sakalasăkṣī vruḥ riṅ ahala la van ahayu, kita tumonaṅ adoh apaR̥k· riṁ rahineṅ kuL̥m·, kita manarira, Umasuki sarvvabhūta, At· R̥ṅyə:kə:n tekiṁ śapatha samaya, pamaṁmaṁ mami ri kita kamu hyaṁ kabeḥ, Ikaṁ śapatha sāmaya su mpaḥ sinrahakə:n iṅ hulun iri kita, yăvat ikaṁ vvaṁ kabeḥ Agə:ṅ aḍmit· salviranya, yadyan· caturaśrama , brāhmacāri gr̥hastha, bhikṣuka, Athaca, caturvarṇa, kṣatriya, veśya, śūdra, mvaṁ pinhey akurug ava j uh a nak thāni, makādi saṁ prabhumantryānăgata, yăvat umulahulaḥ I saṁ hyaṁ dharmma riṁ śrī rameśvarapura, mne hlə: m· tka ri dlāhani dlāha, Amibikamubakāmuṅkil·muṅkilā ri saṁ hyaṁ dharmma ri śrī rameśvarapura, ṅunive ḥ, yan paṁdavuta ri saṁ hyaṁ Upa , Aṅalihakna ri tan sayogya Uṅgvananira, tasmāt kabyə:t karmmākna ṇari la si ma nya, pa rikalanə:nta ya vehə:n sāra, tan· vuruṅa patyananta kamu hyaṁ, dāyānta pamigraha, ya sa saṁ n apa ra parān· humalintaṁ ri tgal·, sahutə:n deni hulā mandi, riṅ alas· dmakə:n deni vyāghra, ma hana ṅ la laṅka , sarikə:n· deniṁ banaspati, mogha kneṁ vilantiḥ, riṁ vai sahut·tə:n· deniṁ vuhaya maṁ mi miṁ   15 , mumul tuvira timiṅgila mahāgila, yan riṁ havanevə:ḥ sumə:ṅka kapaguta I luñcipiṁ paras·, tu murun kaduhuṅa kajuṅkə:la pə̄pə̄satikə:l· R̥mpa, riṁ ratā kasopa vulaṅuna ha , riṅ huda ṅə:ṅə:na li lili n· samb rR̥n deniṁ glap·, yan· paṅher iṅ umaḥ, katibāna bajrāgni tan pavarṣa, limutə:n· gsə:ṅa ə: ə na deni saṁ hyaṁ Agnī, vehə:n· basmĭbhūta saha dravyanya tan panoliha ri vuntat·, taruṁ riṁ paṅadə:gan· , tampyal· ri kiva, Uvahi ri tṅə:nan·, tutuh uṇḍuhanya, blaḥ kapālanya, ḍaḍat i və:tə:ṁnya tke ḍaḍa nya, və:tvakə:n· daL̥manya, Inum· rāḥnya, Atə:hə:r pə:pə:dakə:n· bvaṅakə:n· vkas i prāṇāntika, bva ṅakə:n· ri mahārorava, Astu Astu, .  .  ,   yăvat pratiṣṭate bhūmo,  mahāmeru suparvvataḥ,  tăva  t kilviṣabhūktiḥ syāt·, rājānugrahalaṅghyanāt·,  . ,   yo rājānugrahaṁ hatvā,  mohād mŭrko na 

--- TRANSLATION ---
  Hail! Elapsed Śaka year 1197, month of Jyeṣṭha, fifteenth  tithi of the waxing fortnight, Tuṅle, Pon, Monday, Gumrǝg; the vuku grahacāra in the North; lunar mansion of Mūla; deity Toya i.e., Water ; the maṇḍala in the Northwest; conjunction Śukla; muhūrta Śveta; karaṇa Viṣṭi; regent of the astronomical node Śaśī; zodiac sign Gemini. That was when the command of his majesty the king, overlord of kings,  dyah Ūrdhaja i.e., Mūrdhaja , royal goose in the forest of lotuses that is Viṣṇu’s family , whose illustrious footstool is brushed by the jewel crests of all enemy kings bowing down , who is like the sun in bringing about blossoming of the red-lotuses that are the hearts of all good people , who is , like a rutting elephant to the lotuses which are the heads of the overlords of Seven Gold Land whose hands were like the flow of the Ganges with uninterrupted gifts of silver, gold, jewels and garments , who was terrifying , like Bhīma by the might of his arms which were unimpeded in the middle of the battle-stage virtuous son of the Sun who was Jaya Śrī Viṣṇuvardhana , as it were the great ambrosia of the churning through Mount Mandara of the ocean which was the illustrious queen Śrī Jayavardhanī ,
	whose royal consecration-name is Śrī Kr̥tanagara Vikramadharmottuṅgadeva,
	was received by all three Lords great ministers, the Lord minister of Hino   The total of paddy fields bestowed: 2  2 jǝṅ ; the  anapu prāṇa : 2 jǝṅ ; the one who has banana-leaves: 1  kikil ; all leaders waiting in throngs: 1  jǝṅ , 1 kikil ; sharing 1 jǝṅ ; all leaders waiting to be pierced: 1  jǝṅ , 1 kikil ; sharing 1 jǝṅ ; 4 (heads of) communities: 4  jǝṅ ; head of fighters: 1  jǝṅ , 1 kikil ;  gusti : 1 jǝṅ ; fighters, 3 sharing equally: 1  jǝṅ , 1 kikil ; head of fighters to be pierced: 1  jǝṅ ;  gusti : 1 kikil ;  jagulan : 1 jǝṅ ;  malas : 1 jǝṅ ; iron smith: 1  jǝṅ ;  paṅakan : 1 kikil ; laundryman: 1 jǝṅ . cā . On the units As for the rest, it shall have the status of patrimony jǝṅ and kikil , see . The latter is abbreviated 151 ki . The abbreviation cā seems to stand for cacah . It is also found in Waharu III (3v1–2): kunaṁ tiṅkaḥniṁ savaḥ kataṇḍan· I vaharu cā 3 jǝ:ṁ 36 ki 1 kapramāṇa deniṁ nāyakanya . for the offspring and distant offspring of Śrī Brahmarāja. Also the product of laying it bare. And the non-irrigated fields, the orchards, they have the status of patrimony. kaputrāṅśan As for the perimeter of the land of the holy foundation of Śrī Rāmeśvarapura: In the East, adjoining with Kijaṅan, it goes South straight up to the ravine; adjoining with Kijaṅan, it makes a sharp angle South-East following the ravine, for 679 fathoms. Together with the river adjoining with Kijaṅan, it goes South for 96 fathoms. It goes down into the ravine, adjoining with Kijaṅan, goes South-West following the ravine for 340 fathoms. Together with the river adjoining with Kijaṅan, it comes out of the ravine  akāra  ? for 5 fathoms, up to the South-East point, the boundary stone at Raṅrǝ Bañjar. East is Kijaṅan; South is Blut. It goes West from the South-East point, South of the ravine for 5 fathoms, up to the South point. Adjoining with Blut, it goes West from the South point, South of the river, for 5 fathoms, up to the South-West point. Adjoining with Blut, it goes North from the South-West point, cutting through the river, for 175 fathoms. Adjoining with Blut, it bends North-West, up to the river, for 160 fathoms. Adjoining with Blut, it goes North cutting through the river, for 340 fathoms. Adjoining with Pagǝr, it bends North-East, for 80 fathoms. Adjoining with Soso, it goes straight North up to the West point, for 110 fathoms. Adjoining with Soso, it makes a sharp angle toward the West, for 60 fathoms. Adjoining with Soso, it makes a sharp angle kulumpaṅ and goes straight toward the North, for 840 fathoms. Adjoining with the lake, it makes a sharp angle towards the West, for 18 fathoms. Adjoining with the lake, it makes a sharp angle The toponyms from the lost part of the boundary description can be inferred from the list of villagers having served as witnesses on plate 12a. 


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 9: DHARMA_INSIDENKSangguran.xml
Title: Sangguran Charter (928-08-02)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: nakṣatra|samudra|vāra|sapatha|samgat|sīma|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ|piṇḍa
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
   Main text   Front   Avighnam astu   śiva  m a stu sarvva-jagataḥ para-hita-nirat ḥ bhav a ā ntu bhūta- ā a gaṇ āḥ doṣāḥ prayāntu nāśām· sarvvatra sukhī bhavatu lokaḥ ma    svasti śaka-varṣātīta 850 śravaṇa-māsa tithi caturdaśi śukla-pakṣa, vu ‚ ka ‚ śa ‚ vāra‚ hastā-nakṣatra, viṣṇu-devatā‚ sobhāgya - yo ga, Irikā divasani Ājñă śrī mahārāja,  rakai paṅkaja dyaḥ vava śrī vijayalokanāmo tuṅga, tinaḍaḥ rakryān· mapatiḥ I hino s t pu si ṇḍo k· śrī Īśānavikrama, Umiṅsor· I samgat· momah-umaḥ kāliḥ maḍaṇḍər· pu padma‚ Aṅgəhan· pu kuṇḍala, kumonakan· Ikanaṁ va nu A I saṁ guran· vatak· vaharu‚ gavai mā  2 p ṅguhan· tapak· mas· u a su  6 sīmān· susukan· denīkanaṁ punta I manañjuṁ maṅaran· ḍaṅ ācāryya ḍa li ci khya‚ muAṁ si dahil·  s y aṅgudī, səpət·, ḍa pu jambaṁ, kəsək·, ḍa pu bhairava, basya‚ lukiṁ‚ bhaṇḍa‚ tamblaṁ, haḍaṁ‚ cigər·‚ ḍa pu ruyut· vilaṁ, kañju, durdig·, suji , sugas·, Arpaṇākna I bhaṭāra I saṁ hyaṁ prasāda kabha ktyan· Iṁ sīma kajuru-gusalyan· I manañjuṁ, paknānya sīma punpuna na bhaṭāra, Umahayva Asiṁ samananā I saṁ hyaṁ dharmma saṅkānaniṁ śiva-caru-nivedya I bhaṭāra prātidina, maṅkana Iṣṭa-  prayojana śrī mahā rāja muAṁ rakryān· mapatiḥ rikanaṁ vanuA I saṅguran· Inarpaṇnākan· I bhaṭāra I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyan· Iṁ sīma kajuru-gusalyan· I manañjuṁ māri vatak· vaharu , parṇnahanya svatantra tan· katamāna deniṁ patiḥ va huta muAṁ saprakāraniṁ maṅilala drabya haji Iṁ daṅū‚ miśra para-miśra vulu-vulu prakāra, paṅuraṁ , kriṁ, paḍam·, manimpiki, paranakan·, limus galuḥ‚ paṅa ru han·, taji‚ vatu tajam·‚ sukun·‚ halu varak·‚ rakadut· ,  pinilai, kataṅgaran·, tapa haji, Air haji, malandaṁ, L̥ca, L̥blab·‚ kalaṁkaṁ, kutak·‚ taṅkil·, tr̥pan·, salvit·‚ tuha dagaṁ, juru gusali‚ tuhān n ambi, tuhān huñjaman·, tuhān juḍi‚ juru jalir·, pamaṇikan·, miśra hino‚ vli hapū, vli vaduṁ‚ vli tambaṁ‚ vli pañjut·‚ vli haR̥ṁ‚ pabisar·‚ palamak· ,  pakaluṅkuṁ, Urutan·, dampulan·, tpuṁ kavuṁ‚ suṁsuṁ paṅuraṁ‚ pasuk alas·, payuṅan·, sipat· vilut·, pāṅin-aṅin·, pamāvaśya, puluṁ pa ḍi, skar ta hun·‚ panrāṅan·, panusuḥ, hopan·‚ sambal· sumbul· , hulun· haji pamr̥ ṣi vatak· I jro, Ityaivamādi tan tamā Irikanaṁ va nuA śīma I saṁguran·, kevalā bhaṭāra I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyān· Iṁ sīma kajuru-gusalyān· I manañjuṁ Ataḥ pramāṇā I sadr̥bya-hajinya kabaiḥ ,  samaṅkana Ikanaṁ sukha-duḥkha kady āṅgāniṁ mayaṁ tan· pavvaḥ‚ valū rumambat· Iṁ natar·‚ vipa ti , vaṅkai kābunān·, rāḥ kasavur· Iṁ da lan·, văk·-capalā‚ duhilatan·, hidu kasirat·, hasta-capalā , mami jilakan· turaḥniṁ kikir·‚ mamūk· , mamumpaṁ, ludān·‚ tūta n·, ḍaṇḍa kuḍaṇḍa , bhaṇḍihalādi, bhaṭāra I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyān· Ataḥ parānani drabya-hajinya, kūnaṁ Ikanaṁ miśra‚ mañambul·  ,  mañaṁvriṁ, maṁlākha, maṅubar·‚ matarub·‚ maṅapus·‚ manūla vu ṅkuḍu‚ maṁgula‚ maṁdyun·‚ maṁhapū‚ mamubut·‚ maṁluruṁ‚ maga vai ruṅki, payuṁ vlū, mopiḥ‚ Akajaṁ, magavai kī sī , maṅanam-a nam·, manavaṁ, manahəb·, mamisaṇḍuṁ manuk·‚ makala-kalā kapva ya tribhāgā n· dra b ya-hajinya, sadūmān· Umarā I bha ṭāra, sadūman· Umarā I saṁ makmitan· sīma, sadūman maparaha I saṁ maṅilala drabya haji,  kapva Ikanaṁ masambyavahāra hana ṅkāna hiniṁ-hīṅan· kv ai hanya , Anuṁ tan· knā de saṁ maṅilala drabya ha ji‚ tluṁ tuhān· Iṁ sasambyavahāra Iṁ sasī ma, yan paṅulaṁ kbo 20 sapi 40 vḍus· 80 Aṇḍaḥ savantayan·‚ maguluṅan· tluṁ pasaṁ, maṅaraḥ tluṁ lumpaṁ‚ paṇḍai sobuba n·‚ paḍahi tluṁ taṁ kilan·‚ ma titiḥ sakulit·, Uṇḍahagi satuhān·, macadar pataṁ pacadaran·, pa rahu 1 masuṁhara 3 tan patuṇḍāna, 
yāpvan pinikul· dagaṁnya ka dy a ṅgā niṁ mabasana, ma sayaṁ , makacapuri, maṅuñjal·, maṅavari, kapas·‚ vuṅku ḍ u, vsi, tambaga‚ gaṁsa‚ timaḥ, paḍat·, pamaja, vuyaḥ‚ lṅa‚ bras·, gu la ,  bsar·‚ kasumba, saprakāraniṁ dval· pinikul· kalima vantal· Iṁ satuhān· pikul-pikulananya Iṁ sasīma  I kanaṁ samaṅkana tan· knāna de saṁ maṅila la drabya haji, saparānanya sadeśanya, ndān· makmitana ya tulis· maṅkai lvīranya‚ yāpvan· lbiḥ saṅkā rikanaṁ sapaṁhīṁ Iriya‚ knāna akalbiḥnya de saṁ maṅilala ś s so dhā ra haji tan· A dhikāna, Irikanaṁ kāla maṅasəĀkan· Ikanaṁ punta I manañjuṁ pasak·-pasak· I śrī mahārāja pirak·  kā  1 vḍihan· ta pis· yu  1 , rakryān· mapatiḥ I hino śrī Īśānavikrama InaṁsəĀn· pasak-pa sak· pirak· kā  1 vḍihan· tapis· yu  1 ,  sirikan· pu marai ra kai ndra, rakai vka pu balyaṁ, samgat· momah- u maḥ kāliḥ maḍaṇdər·, Aṅgəhan· InaṁsəĀn· pasak-pasak· pirak· dhā  5 vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ ,  tiruAn· ḍa punta taritip·, Amrāti havaṁ vicakṣaṇa, pulu vatu pu paṇḍamuAn·‚ halaran· pu guṇottama, maṁhuri pu maṅuvil·, vadihati pu dinakara‚ makudur· pu balavān·, InaṁsəĀn· pasak-pasak· pirak· dhā  1  mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ, vaharu rikaṁ kālaṁ pu variga Inaṁsə Ān· pasak-pasak· pirak· dhā   1  mā 4 vḍihan·  y u 1 ,  samgat· Anakbi dhā  7  mā  8 kain· vlaḥ 1 , saṁ tuhān· I vaharu vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· pirak· dhā  6 kinabai ḥ hanira, tuhān· I vadihati 2 mira-miraḥ saṁ halaṁ pahu ṁ , halara n· saṁ suddhyā sth a ,  tu hān· I makudur· 2 vatu valaiṁ saṁ te, bhū ra saṁ vari ṅin·, 

paṅura ṁ I vadihati saṁ ra vuṅu, manuṅgu saṁ hovaṅka, paṅuraṁ I makudur· saṁ ra kvəl·‚ manuṅgu saṁ ku Back lumpaṁ‚ vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· pirak· mā  1 , vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, saṁ tuhān· I pakaraṇān· makabaihan· juru ka na ya kā n· I hino samgat· guṇuṅan· pu tun·tun·‚ juru vadvā rarai, saṁ ra guyu‚ juru kalula pu vali, kaṇḍamuhi saṁ geṣṭa, parujar· I siri kan· hujuṁ galuḥ, I vka viri diḥ, I kanuruhan· saṁ rokat, I sbaṁ saṁ vimala‚ I bavaṁ saṁ jalaṁ, I maḍaṇḍər· saṁ cakra, ryy āṅgəhan· saṁ tu han·, I tiruAn· sumuḍan· ḍa punta saṅgama, I hujuṁ saṁ pavuduka n· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· pira k· dhā  2  mā  8 kinabaihanira, saṁ citrale kha  I hino pasak-pasak· dhā  2  mā  8 kinabai han i ra , patiḥ juru kāliḥ vasaḥ saṁ kulumpaṁ, kuci saṁ ra kavil· , pasak-pasak· dhā  1  mā  4 sovaṁ-so vaṁ, parujarnya piṁsor hyaṁ paskaran·, pasak-pasak· pirak·  mā sovaṁ-sovaṁ, lumaku manusuk· I vadihati saṁ kamala, 5 l umaku manusuk· I makudur· saṁ taja m·  I su su han· saṁṅ astuti saṁ balā, I tapa haji saṁ pacintān· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· dhā  1 vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ I kanuruhan·  i saṁ jā ta patiḥ I hujuṁ saṁ kahyunan·, patiḥ I vaharu saṁ nīla‚ patiḥ I tugaran· saṁ mala, patiḥ p amgat· I vaharu saṁ gambo‚ patiḥ paṅkur· saṁ maṅka, saṁ raṅga vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· dhā  1 vḍi han· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ lampuran· saṁ prasama, pasak-pasak· pirak· mā  8 vḍihan· hlai 1 parujar patiḥ si manohara pa sak-pasak· dhā  1 vḍihan· yu  1 , parujar patiḥ I ka nuru han· si ja lu k·, si rambət‚ parujar patiḥ I vaharu si bṅal· , si tañjak·, si cacu‚ pasak-pasak· pirak· mā  8 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, va hu ta I vaharu si ba lu syak· si kəndul·, tuha kalaṁ‚ vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· dhā  1 vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, piluṅgaḥ si rāji‚ si bantan·‚ piṇḍat·  vi naiḥ vḍihan· hlai 1  sovaṁ -sovaṁ, rāma tpi si riṁ milu pinakasākṣīniṁ manusuk· sĭma , I tugaran· gusti si lakṣita, tuha kalaṁ si yogya‚ vinaiḥ pasak-pasa k· pirak· mā  8 vḍihan·  yu 1  sovaṁ-sovaṁ‚ I kajavān· , I pavaṅkuAn·, si surā‚ I kḍi -kḍi si pahaṁ, I buṁkaliṅan· si tiñjo‚ Iṁ kapatihan· si piṅul·, I ḍahu si tambas· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· pirak· mā  4 sovaṁ‚ pa tiḥ I vuṅa-vuṅa pirak· mā  4 , ri ṁ papanahan· vinkas· si mañjava t ·‚ I kajar· kulapati si kaṇḍi, I tampur· si təṅəran· vinaiḥ pasak-pasak· pirak· mā  4 sovaṁ, si mañā si kəsək· si vudalū si kudi‚ matətə ṅə n·, si luluk· vinaiḥ pasak· pirak· mā  4 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ‚ Abañol· si lulut·‚ si s p at·, si hiR̥ṁ‚ vinaiḥ vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ, Avayaṁ si rahina pirak· mā  4 vḍihan· yu  1 saṁ boddhi‚ saṁ mārgga‚ vi naiḥ vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ, I tlasniṁ mavaiḥ pasak-pasak· muAṁ vḍihan· I sira kabaiḥ pinarṇnaḥ Ikanaṁ saji I saṁ makudur· I sorniṁ vitāna‚ maṅārgha ta saṁ pinakaviku  sumaṅask āra Ikanaṁ susuk· muAṁ kulumpaṁ, maṇḍiri ta saṁ makudur· maṅañjali I saṁ hyaṁ təAs· maluṅguḥ I sorniṁ vitāna‚ mān·dlan· pāda humaR̥ppakan· saṁ hyaṁ tə As·, masiṅhal· vḍihan· yu  1 tumŭt saṁ va dihati, lumkas· saṁ makudur· maṅuyut· manətə k· gulūniṁ hayām·‚ linaṇḍəssakan· Iṁ kulumpaṁ, mama ntiṅa kan· han·tlū Iṁ vatu sīma, mamaṁmaṁ manapathe saminaṁmaṁnira daṅū‚ I katguhakna saṁ hyaṁ vatu sīma‚ Ikana līṁnira‚ Īndaḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ I baprakeśvara A  ga sti mahā R̥ṣi pūrvva dakṣiṇa paścimottara maddhya Ūrddha m adha ḥ ravi śaśī kṣi ti jala pavana hūtāśana yajamānākāśa dha rmma Ahorātra sa ndhyā hr̥daya, ya k ṣ a rāk ṣ asa pisāca pre tāsura garuḍa gandharvva catvāri lokapāla, yama varuṇa kuvai ra bāśava muAṁ putra deva tā pañcakuśika‚ nandīśvara mahākāla ṣadvinā yaka nāgarājā dū rggādevī caturāśra, Ananta surendra, A nanta hyaṁ kālamr̥tyu gaṇabhū ta kita pra siddha maṁrakṣa kaḍatva n· śrī mahārāja I mḍaṁ I ṁ bhūmi matarā m· kita Umi lu ma narīra, Umasuk iṁ sarvva -sarīra kita sakala sākṣī-bhūta tumon madoḥ lāvan mapaR̥̄‚ riṁ rahina‚ riṁ vṅi At· ḍəṅəĀkan· ta Ikeṁ samaya sapatha sumpaḥ pamaṁmaṁma mi ri kita hiyaṁ kabaiḥ, yāvat· Ikanaṁṅ vaṁ du rācāra tan mā gum tan· makmit· Irikeṁ sapatha sinrāhakan· saṁ vahuta hyaṁ kudur·‚ hadyan· hulun· matuha ra rai laki-laki vadvan·‚ viku grahastha muAṁ patiḥ vahuta rāma A siṁ Umu lah-ulaḥ Ikeṁ vanuA I saṅguran·‚ sīma Ina rpaṇākan·nikanaṁ punta I mana ñjuṁ I bhaṭāra‚ I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda kabhaktyan· Iṁ sīma kajuru-gusalyan·‚ I dlāhaniṁ dlāha vavaka ta ya , ṅuni vaiḥ yan ḍavuta saṁ hyaṁ vatu sīma, tasmā t· ka buAtaknanya, patyanantāta ya kamuṁ hyaṁ, deyantat pa tīya‚ tatt a noliha I vuntat·, tat t iṁhala I likura n·, taruṁ Iṅ adəga n· , tampya l · I viraṅa n·‚ tutuḥ tuṇḍunya vlaḥ kapālanya sbitakan· vtaṁnya rantann ususnya vtuAkan· ḍalmanya‚ ḍuḍuk· hatīnya paṅan dagiṁnya Inum· rāḥnya təhər pə pə da kan· vkasakan· prāṇantika, yan· para riṅ alas paṅananniṁ moṁ‚ patukniṁṅ u lā pulīraknaniṁ devamanyu, yan para riṁ tgal· Alappa nniṁ glap· sampalaniṁ rākṣasa, pa ṅananniṁ vuIl· si pamuṅuAn·, Araḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ kuśika gargga metrī kuruṣya pātāñjala, suvuk· lor· suvuk kidu l· suvuk kuluAn· suvuk· vai ta n·, buAṅakan· ri ṅ ākāśa, salambitakan· I hyaṁ kabaiḥ‚ tibāka n· riṁ mahāsamudra‚ klammakan· Iṁ ḍavuhan· Alapan· saṁ hyaṁ jalamm er· du dutanniṁ tuviran· saṁhapanniṁ vuhaya‚ ṅkānan matya Ika naṁṅ vaṁ Anyāya lumbur· Ikeṁ vanuA sĭma I saṁgura n· , Upadravā riṁ devatā bhrāṣṭa liputanni ṁ  ḍira muliha ‚ tibāka riṁ kanaraka rikaṁ naraka n· Iṁ mahārorava , klan de saṁ yamabala‚ palun de saṁ kiṅkara‚ piṁpitva Ata yan· bimbān· pāpa Ata ya‚ saṁ sāra sajīvakāla, salvi r niṁ duḥkha paṅguhanya sarūpaniṁ lara hiḍapannya, s akelikniṁ maṁjanma dadya na nya, Avūka tan· tammuAṁ sāma, vkasakan· havu kairir·, maṅka nā tmahananikanaṁṅ vaṁ Anyāya l u mbura Ikeṁ śīma I saṅguran·, I tlas saṁ makudur maṅu  y u · masalin ta sira kabaiḥ k t , kapva ma luṅguḥ Iṁ tkan pasək· tumūt· krama saṁ hana riṁ kon· pa tiḥ vahuta rāma kabayan· muAṁ rāma tpi siriṁ kabaiḥ, matuha manvam laki-laki vadvan· kaniṣṭamaddhyamot t ama‚ tan hana kān t un·, Umilu manaḍaḥ riṁ pa glaran·, kinuran·-kuran· InaṁsəAn· skul· dandānan·, hinirusan· kla-kla Ambil-ambil·, kasyan· lit-lit· tlu saranak· saṅa-saṅān· haryyas· rumba-ru mbaḥ kuluban· tetis· tumpuk-tumpuk· ḍeṁ hañaṁ ḍeṁ hasin· kakap· biluṁluṁ ka ḍivas· huraṁ ka van· laya-layar· hala-hala han t iga Inariṁ suṇṭa Atak· pəhan·, piṇḍa gaṅan· Iṁ saron· 8 len· sankā riṁ knas· Ivak· prakāra , Anaḍaḥ ta sira kabaiḥ yathāsu a maṅinum· siddhu‚ ciñca, kilaṁ k kh tu Ak· piṁtiga sovaṁ‚ vinuvuhan· tambul· Inañjapan· k u ravu kurima, Asam· dvadval·, kapva madulur malariḥ, Umaṁsə: taṁ jnu, skar·, rujak· ,  Ana bəḥ ta saṁ ma tuvuṁ ,  maṁḍ iri ta sira kabaiḥ patiḥ pramu kha , manambaḥ humarap· I sārah-araḥni ṁ kahanā n· śrī mahărāja, muAṁ rakryān· mapa tiḥ, I tlasniṁ manambaḥ maṅi Proper right gal· rā vaṇa -hasta, sampun· saṅkap· Ika naṁ  I nig ə laka n· maluṅguḥ sira muvaḥ vinu vu ha n· tambul· linarihan· piṇḍuA so vaṁ, Umaṁs ə : taṁ baṁlus· linarihan· muva ḥ  matlasan· s ira kabaiḥ kapuA muliḥ I y umaḥnira, I kahlammanya gumanti Ikanaṁ r ā ma I saṅguran· mu Aṁ Ikanaṁ punta I manañjuṁ lāvan· saṁ Umyāpāra Ikanaṁ susuka n· s ĭ ma vinaiḥ manaḍaha, Ikanaṁ mabaṅo l· si lulut· si spat· si hiraṁ kapva Umi ntonakan· guṇanya, Irikanaṁ vṅi manaṁ gap· ta sirăvayaṁ maṅaran· rahina, nā han· kramanikanaṁ susukan· sīma I sa ṅguran·, s mpun· samprayukta, likhita u a citralekha I hino lakṣaṇa     Extra lines at bottom of A and top of B     vinai ḥ pirak· pasak-pasak· vḍihan· yu  1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ , ri s th iranya vanu A I saṁguran·     prayatnakna lava Atavakadusīrahi kvaiḥ, Aṅuṅguṅ i vka paṅura  lunavuhak· t· Ahalulu vvaye katmuAni putra-putr(i) gvampimmilipuru vka lu

--- TRANSLATION ---
 


============================================================
INSCRIPTION 10: DHARMA_INSIDENKGulungGulung.xml
Title: Gulung-Gulung (851 Śaka)
Language: kaw-Latn
Date: 
Ritual keywords: homa|nakṣatra|vāra|pūjā|samgat|sīma|tithi|saka|śaka|hyaṁ
============================================================

--- TRANSLITERATION ---
   Front // Oṃ astu gaṇapataye namaḥ // svasti śaka-varṣātīta 851 baiśākha-māsa tithi navamī śukla-pakṣa Avīghnam Avighnam ma  U  ca vāra pūrvvaphālguṇī-nakṣatra, yoṇi-devatā, Āyuṣmān-yoga, Irikā divaśa rakryān·  hujuṁ pu madhura , manambaḥ I śrī mahārāja lokānu rāñjana lokānurañjana rake halu pu siṇḍok· śrī Īśānavikrama dharmmottuṅgadeva, sumīma Ikāṁ dmak ṣavaḥ I guluṅ-guluṁ tapak· su 7, muAṁ Alas· I bantaran· satṅaḥ, paknānya dharmmakṣetrā savahani kuśala rakryān· hujuṁ saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda I himad·, maṅasəA I saṁ hyaṁ kahyaṅan· I paṅavān· mapaṅasəA vḍu s· 1 pāda 1 Aṁkən kapūjān· bhaṭāra I pa ṅavān· Iṁ prativarṣa, Āpan· ṅkai gunuṁ vaṅkḍi mūla kahyaṅan· saṁ hyaṁ I paṅavān· riṁ purāṇa, mataṅyan tuṅgala gatyanikaṁ saṁ hyaṁ kahyaṅan· kapva siliḥ lavada sakarmmaṇya I paṅavān· muAṁ I himad· yan· tka n iṁ kapūjān· bhaṭāra I paṅavā n· Umilva sakarmmaṇya I himad· tkaniṁ ka pūjān· bhaṭāra I himad· Ilva sakarmmaṇya I paṅavān· Iṁ biśuva kāla n· prasiddha tuṅgal· bhaṭāra maṅadhiṣṭhāna I himad· I paṅavān· muAṁ hana ta sīma putrasva I batvan· muAṁ I curu Iy air gilaṁ I gapuk·, I sbaṁ paknānya maṅasəA I saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda I himad·, kramani paṅasə:nya I batvan· śīkhā ha  pañjat· I curu lṅa vatu sukat· 1, kalapa 20 mā 1 Iy air gilaṁ Iṅa vatu sukat· 20 mā 2 Iṁ gapuk·  mā 1 maṅkana kramani paṅasə:nikanaṁ sīma putrasva mi jila Aṅkən· biṣuva ri ṁ kapūjān· bhaṭāra ri himad·, maṁ kana sa m b aḥ  rak ryān· hujuṁ I śrī mahārāja tlas sinanmata, matəhər ta ya pinagəhakan· Inarpaṇākan· rakryān· hujuṁ I saṁ hyaṁ prā sā da An· sīmā savaha saṁ hyaṁ prāsāda I himad· paknānya svatantrā tan katamāna deni patiḥ vahuta rāma, nāyaka pa rtta ya pamgat· ṅunivaiḥ saprakāraniṁ maṅilala drabya haji riṁ daṅ ū miśra-paramiśra vulu-vulu prakāra paṅuraṁ kriṁ· paḍam· manimpi ki paranakan· limus galuḥ, paṅaruhan·, taji vatu tajam·, sukun·, halu varak· rakadut· pini l ai kataṅgaran·, tapa haji  Air haji, malandaṁ, L̥ca, L̥bə-L̥b· kalaṁkaṁ kutak·, taṅkil·, tr̥pan·, saluIt·, tuha dagaṁ, tuha gusali, maṁrumbai maṅguñjai tu - hān nambi, tuhān· huñjamman·, vatu valaṁ, pamaṇikan·, maṇiga, sikpan·, rumban·, vilaṁ vanuA, viji kavaḥ, tiṅkəs·, mā vi  tuhāñ ju ḍ i, juru jalir·, miśra hino, vli hapū, vli tambaṁ, vli pañjut·, vli haR̥ṁ, palamak·, paka luṅkuṁ Urutan·, dampu lan·  tpuṁ kavuṁ, suṁ-suṁ paṅuraṁ, pasuk alas·, payuṅan·, puluṁ paḍi, pabisar·, paguluṁ, pāṅinn-aṅin·, sipat bilut·, pāmavaśya, ho pa n·, turun-turun·, panrāṅan·, skar tahun·, panusuḥ, pahaliman·, kḍi valyan·, vidu, maṅiduṁ, sambal sumbul·, hulun· ha - j i pamr̥si, vatakk i jro, Ityaivammādi tan· tamā Irikanaṁ sīma kevala saṁ hyaṁ parhyaṅan·, pramāṇā I sadrab ya - hajin ya ka baiḥ, maṅkana Ikanaṁ sukhaduḥkha kady aṅganiṁ mayaṁ tan mavuAḥ valū rumambat· Iṁ natar·, vipati vaṅ ka y· kāb unan·, rāḥ ka sa vu r iṁ dalan· vākcapalā duhilatan· hastacapalā mamtuAkan· vūriniṅ k i kir· mam uk·, mamumpaṁ, lūdan·, tūtan·, ḍa ṇḍa kuḍaṇḍa bhaṇḍihalādi bhaṭāra riṁ prāsāda Ataḥ parā nan i sadrab ya-hajinya kunaṁ Ikāṁ miśra mañambul·, mañavriṁ maṁ lā kha , maṅapus·, ma pahaṅan ·, matarub · man ū la v uṅkuḍu, maṁdyun·, maṅubar·, maṁhapū, maṁluruṁ, magavai ruṅki, payuṁ vlu mopiḥ, maka jaṁ Agavai kisi, maṅanam-anam·, mamubut·, manavaṁ, makala-kalā, mamisaṇḍuṁ manuk·, bhaṭāra ri prāsāda Ataḥ pramāṇa I sadra bya hajinya, samaṅkana Ikanaṁ parahu pavalijān· 1, masuṁhara 2 tan· patuṇḍāna, Adagaṁ kapas·, vuṅkuḍu, Abasana kalima banta l·  Aṅuñjal· 1 paṇḍai vsi satarub·, paṇḍai mas· 1 paṇḍai tambaga 1 kaṁsa 1 Aṅulaṁ kbo savurugan· sapi prāṇa 3 vḍu s·  sa pa raṅgaṁ Aṅulaṅ aṇḍaḥ satar ub·, samaṅkana kramanikaṁ sīma tan· knā I saluĪrniṁ drabya haji saprakāra, Irikanaṁ kā Back la ma ṅasəAkan· rakryān· hujuṁ pasək·-pasək·, I śrī mahārāja mas· su 5 vḍihan· tapiś cadar· yu 1 muAṁ I ra kryān· kabaiḥ, kapuA vinaiḥ pasək·-pasək· kāyānurūpa, rakai sirikan· dyah amarendra, vka dyaḥ balyaṁ, rakryā n· mo ma h-umaḥ kāliḥ maḍaṇdər· pu padma, Aṅgəhan· pu kuṇḍala, tiruan· ḍapunta taritip· InaṁsəAn· pasək· mā 1,  vḍi ha n· tapiś cadar· yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, halaran· pu guṇottama, InaṁsəAn· pasək· mā 1, vḍihan· ragi yu 1 mamrāti havaṁ vi cakṣaṇa, ma ṁ hūri pu paṇḍamuan·, tilimpik· pu dhanuka, dalinan· pu karṣaṇa, vinaiḥ pasək· mā 5 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vadihati saṁ dinakara, Akudur· pu balavān· vinaiḥ pasək· ma 1, vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, tuhān· I vadihati 2 miraḥ-miraḥ, saṁ halaṁ pahuṁ, halaran· saṁ lbūr poḥ, tuhān· I makudur· 2 vatu valeṁ saṁ ra majjha, va tu kiluṁ saṁ tpussən· vinaiḥ pasək· mā 5 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, paṅuraṁ I vadihati saṁ ra vuṅū, Anuṅgū saṁ ho ṅka paṅuraṁ I makudur· saṁ ra kvəl·, Anuṅgū saṁ kulumpaṁ vinaiḥ pasək· mā 2 ku 2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, saṁ tuhā n· I  pakaraṇān· juru kanayakān· samgat· gunuṅan· pu tu ntun·, juru vadva rarai saṁ ra guyu, juru kalula pu bālī, kaṇḍamuhi punta geṣṭa vatu varaṇi saṁ nidhi, parujar· I sirikan· hujuṁ galuḥ I vka viridiḥ, I kanuruhan· rokat·, I sbaṁ saṁ vimala, I srāṅan· saṁ sa tyaka, I madaṇḍər saṁ cakra, ryy āṅgəhan· saṁ vidya, I tiruAn· sumuḍan· punta saṅgama vinaiḥ pasək· mā 1, kinabaihāni ra lumaku manusuk· I vadihati saṁ ra və:han·, I makudur· saṁ ra mājha vinaiḥ pasək· mas· su 2 mā 8 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, paṅaṅka t· I saṁ hyaṁ kudur· mas· su 5 hop saji pomah-umaḥ prakāra dakṣiṇa saṁ hyaṁ brahmā mā 1 saṁ hyaṁ lamb u mā 1, saṁ hyaṁ su su k· vḍihan· yu 1 vḍihan·nire vadihati makudur· yu 2 siṁhəl·nira yu 1, patiḥ juru kāliḥ vasaḥ saṁ kayu matə:b·, ku c i saṁ būka vinaiḥ pasək· mā 5 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, parujarnya piṅsor hyaṁ paskaran· vinaiḥ mā 2 ku 2 sovaṁ-sovaṁ patiḥ kahyunnan· puntani turus· saṁ ḍumpil·, varaṇā, saṅ ambata, saṁ smī, vinaiḥ mā 2 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ ka hyunan maṅharR̥p· babak· rikaṁ kāla saṁ lāgi vinaiḥ mā 5 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 vargga patiḥ Anakbi Ilu kinannān· pasək· saṁ baraṇa A nakbi saṁ najī Ibuni marapi, saṁ kbək· vinaiḥ mā 2 kain· vlaḥ 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vargga patiḥ kahyunan· laki-laki vinaiḥ pasə k· harivaṅsa, bāṇa, jura ṁ , daṅkal·, marapi, vinaiḥ mā 2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, patiḥ pamgat· saṁ jarā, ma ṁ ha mb i n· saṁ balusyak· vinaiḥ pasək· mā 4 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, juru vanuA saṁ hīra panulisan· prathama, maṇi ga  vinaiḥ mā 2 vḍihan· yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, parujar patiḥ kahyunan· bisat· parujar· patiḥ samgat· babus·, parujar ma ṁ hamb i nanī gu s t i  pañjuruAn· I pakāraṇān· Astuti, malavaṅ kāliḥ jaṅga krāndhaḥ, panaṅlar· bhoma, Ugal-ugal· səvu r·  juru kalaṁ sambī, tajuṅkilan· mḍaṁ gəntər· vinaiḥ mā 1 vḍi ha n· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, vahuta paṅuñjaṅan· dhavala kamasi han· putra laguntan· Unak· vinaiḥ pasək· mā 4 vḍihan· ragi yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, taṇ ḍa rakryān· Ilu pinakasākṣī rikaṁ kāla, kanuruhan· dyaḥ mumpaṁ, vaharu pu k lumpaṁ, vinaiḥ pasək· mas· su 1 mā 4 vḍihan· pa a u ḍ i hlai 1 sovaṁ- sovaṁ saṁ tu hān· I kanuruhan· saṁ ra baṇir saṁ ra vujaṁ, vuṅkal kiluṁ, saṁ părtha, vinaiḥ mas· su 1 mā 4 kinabaihānnira vḍihan· ragi hlai 1 so vaṁ-sovaṁ, tpi siriṁ Ilu pinakasākṣī rakryān·, juru gotra I kanuruhan· rakai paṅambuhan·, rakai siñjalan· vinaiḥ mā 4 vḍi han· yu 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ, gotra I tampuran· saṁ mādhava bapa dyaḥ damū muAṁ dyaḥ damū, vinaiḥ mā 2 vḍihan· hlai 1 sovaṁ-sovaṁ devata kaki I balaṇḍit· saṁ śivarāśi vineḥ pasək· mā 4 punta I paṅavan· Uṅgər· pramukha, vinai ḥ  Proper right pasək· mā 4 kinabaihannira patiḥ tpi si riṁ vinai ḥ pasək· karūman· I kanuruhan· saṁ jātaḥ, maṅhambi n·  saṁ hiraṇya, patiḥ pamgat· saṁ prakaśita, patiḥ I tuga ran· paṅajaran· saṁ malaḥ, patiḥ paṁkur· I vaharu saṁ raṅga vinaiḥ pasək· mā 4 vḍihan· yu 1 so vaṁ -sovaṁ, sama ṁ ṅkana kvaiḥ n i ra   i lu pinakasākṣī hinanākə n· kālaniṁ manusuk· ri tlas· I saṁ mapatiḥ vahuta rāma t p i s i riṅ kabaiḥ vinaiḥ pasək·, k i non· ta sira mapaktya, mal ṅguḥ ya ū u th ākrama, Irikāṁ tkan· pasak· lor· kidul·, kuluAn· veta n· Iri kāṅ kalaṅan· ri himad· tumama ta saṁ mavaju haji ri kala ṅan· ri pkan· ri himad· maglar saji suma ṅa skāra saṁ hyaṁ susuk· saṅkap· sakrama niṁ da ṅū manətək· hayam mamantiṅa kan· hantiga I saṁ hyaṁ vatu təAs· su su k· pamaṁmaṁ hyaṁ manapathe liṁ nira  Īndaḥ ta kita kamuṁ hyaṁ I śrī bapra keśvara śrī haricandana Agasti mahā R̥ ṣi saṁ hyaṁ I daśadeśa Ū rdhamadhaḥ  ravi śaśī kṣiti ja la pa va na hutāsana  yajamānākāśa dharmma Aho rātra  yakṣa rakṣasa pisāca, preta Proper left sura   gandharvva yama  baruṇa kuvaira bāsava muAṁ  putra devatā pañcakuśika nā garājā dūrggadevī caturāśra  Ananta surendra hyaṁ kālamr̥tyu sakveḥ ta gaṇa bhūta kita prasiddha  maṁrakṣa pr̥thivi, maṅarīra ri sarvvabhū ta Umasuki sarvvaprāṇa kita sa kala sākṣībhūta sthīti hana sukṣma R̥ ṅəAkan· Ik i ṁ samaya sapa tha  sum paḥ pamaṁ maṁ mami ri kita hiyaṁ ka baiḥ yāvat ikanaṁṅ vaṁ durācāra ta n ma gam· tan makmit·, Umulah-ulaha I k iṁ śīma ṅunivaiḥ dumavuta su suk· təAs· kulumpaṁ tina namniṁ ku dur· Asiṁ sakav v aṅananya hadi A n· hulun· gr̥hasta viku yā vat· ba riba I rikaṁ śīma tadvaraha n· panimbatan· ta Iriya kamu hyaṁ pa ti riṅ adəgan· tampyal i təṅəna n· Uvahi riṁ hiri ṅan· rantan ususnya ḍa ḍa tt i sbitakan· ḍalammanya At manya  ta n· tmuA ṁ sama Irikaṁ sahasra ja nma saluīrniṁ Ūpadrava mtunya ta k-ta k l intaḥ lakay· vdit· tmahana nya pañca mahāpātaka tmunyan ·  yan· liṁnira ri tlasniṁ manusuk· lumkas· ta makuR̥n-kuR̥n· ri sira ka baiḥ, maṁglar· kavuṁ skul· paripūrṇna Proper right: upper part  hara-hara saṅka p· vulu ka ṇḍari kaḍivas· ḍeṁ hañaṁ ḍeṁ hasin· saL̥r· capa-capa, ruma han· huraṁ biluṁluṁ hala-ha la hantiga Inariṁ, vulūniṁ ga ṅan· miśāka , Atak· sisir· takiḥ, kasyan· lil-lit· gāṁ ṅān· tlu saranak· Alap-alap· Irah-iraḥ kuluban· tetis·, lumkas· ta sira kabaiḥ manaḍah ma nahap pa r ka ciñca tva k· pā nā di, tka riṁ piṇḍva piṁtiga, vinuvuhan ta sira ta mb ul· paḍḍīsa salvirniṁ ta mbul·  sapra kāra vinuvuhakan· tadananta ra patṅaḥ manaḍaḥ kinon· sira ka Proper left: upper part baiḥ vasiha gaṅan· vinai han· ta sira jnu skar· tlas saṅkap· mu vaḥ ta sira manaḍaḥ yathās u kha men-men· rakryan· kahaḍaṁ rikaṁ kāla ka puA Umintonnakan· guṇa nya, Atapukan vuvus pramukha vinaiḥ mā 4 kinabaihanya, A vayaṁ kaluṅasu a śravaṇa vi naiḥ mā 4 kinabaihanya, Aba ñol· si livu_ _han· hi tip·-pramukha vinaiḥ mā 4 kinabaihanya, ci hna nya n· tlas· mapagəḥ 

--- TRANSLATION ---
 


